Add LU solver documentation (#890)
PowerGridModel/power-grid-model: docs/advanced_documentation/algorithms/lu-solver.md

#### Sparsity

It is common that a substation is fed by a single upstream substation, i.e., most grids are operated
in a tree-like structure. Meshed grid operations are rare, and even when they do happen, it is
usually only for a small section of the grid. All this gives rise to extremely sparse topologies
and, as a result, extremely sparse matrix equations with a block structure.

Sparse matrix equations can be solved efficiently: they can be solved in linear time complexity, as
opposed to the cubic complexity of naive Gaussian elimination. As a result, a sparse matrix solver
is key to the performance of the power grid model. QR-decomposition therefore is not a good
candidate.

#### Pivot operations

Pivoting of blocks is expensive, both computationally and memory-wise, as it interferes with the
sparse block structure of the matrix equations by introducing new potentially non-zero elements,
called _fill-ins_, during the process of Gaussian elimination. To this end, a pre-fixed permutation
can be chosen to avoid bock pivoting at a later stage.

The [topological structure](#topological-structure) of the grid does not change during the

> solving phase, so the permutation can be obtained by the minimum degree algorithm from just the

Author: i think it deserves its own page :joy: . I will cite the wikipedia article

> solving phase, so the permutation can be obtained by the minimum degree algorithm from just the

Reviewer: Indeed, but since we are only doing the LU part (for now), something as a reference may be a good idea such that the reader has a good starting point.

topology alone, which seeks to minimize the amount of fill-ins. Note that matrix blocks that
contributes topologically to the matrix equation can still contain zeros. It is possible that such
zeros result in [ill-conditioned pivot elements](#pivot-perturbation). Handling of such
ill-conditioned cases is discussed in the [section on pivot perturbation](#pivot-perturbation).

### Power system equation properties

#### Matrix properties of power system equations

[Power flow equations](../../user_manual/calculations.md#power-flow-algorithms) are not Hermitian
and also not positive (semi-)definite. As a result, methods that depend on that property cannot be
used.

[State estimation equations](../../user_manual/calculations.md#state-estimation-algorithms) are
intrinsically positive definite and Hermitian, but for
[performance reasons](#performance-considerations), the matrix equation is augmented to achieve

> a consistent structure across the entire topology using Lagrange multipliers.

Author: for state estimation, the augmented matrix is not positive-semi-definite. it is still hermitian but it is better to have a simple solver

> a consistent structure across the entire topology using Lagrange multipliers.

Reviewer: Can you add a tiny remark for the augmented matrix stating that? Since the statement of the augmented matrix comes after the but, it may raise the same question I made.

> a consistent structure across the entire topology using Lagrange multipliers.

Author: see the alinea below in the same subsection.

\end{align*}
$$

where $\mathbb{1}$ is the matrix with ones on the diagonal and zeros as off-diagonal elements and
$\mathbb{M}_{p+1}$ is the start of the next iteration. They together form the LU-decomposition as

$$
\mathbb{M}_p \equiv
\begin{bmatrix} 1 && \boldsymbol{0}^T \\ m_p^{-1} \boldsymbol{q}_p && \mathbb{1}_p\end{bmatrix}\begin{bmatrix}
    1 && \boldsymbol{0}^T \\
    \boldsymbol{0} && \hat{\mathbb{M}}_p - m_p^{-1} \boldsymbol{q}_p \boldsymbol{r}_p^T
\end{bmatrix}\begin{bmatrix} m_p && \boldsymbol{r}_p^T \\\boldsymbol{0} && \mathbb{1}_p\end{bmatrix}
\equiv \mathbb{L}_p \begin{bmatrix}
    1 && \boldsymbol{0}^T \\
    \boldsymbol{0} && \mathbb{M}_{p+1}
\end{bmatrix} \mathbb{U}_p
$$

or, with the previous iteration also shown,

$$
\mathbb{M}_{p-1} \equiv \mathbb{L}_{p-1} \begin{bmatrix}
    1 && \boldsymbol{0}^T \\
    \boldsymbol{0} && \mathbb{L}_p
\end{bmatrix}\begin{bmatrix}
    1 && 0 && \boldsymbol{0}^T \\
    0 && 1 && \boldsymbol{0}^T \\
    \boldsymbol{0} && \boldsymbol{0} && \mathbb{M}_{p+1}
\end{bmatrix} \begin{bmatrix}
    1 && \boldsymbol{0}^T \\
    \boldsymbol{0} && \mathbb{U}_p
\end{bmatrix}\mathbb{U}_{p-1}

> $$

Author: better?

> $$

Reviewer: Yes! Resolving.

$$
\begin{align*}
\mathbb{L} = \begin{bmatrix}
1 && 0 && \cdots && 0 \\
\boldsymbol{l}_0 && \ddots && \ddots && \vdots \\
 && \ddots && \ddots && 0 \\
 && && \boldsymbol{l}_{N-2} && 1
\end{bmatrix} &= \begin{bmatrix}
1 && 0 && \cdots \\
m_0^{-1} \boldsymbol{q}_0 && 1 && \ddots \\
&& m_1^{-1} \boldsymbol{q}_1 && \ddots \\
&& && \ddots
\end{bmatrix} \\
\mathbb{U} = \begin{bmatrix}
m_0 && \boldsymbol{u}_0^T && && \\
0 && m_1 && \ddots && \\
\vdots && \ddots && \ddots && \boldsymbol{u}_{N-2}^T \\
0 && \cdots && 0 && m_{N-1}
\end{bmatrix} &= \begin{bmatrix}
m_0 && \boldsymbol{r}_0^T && && \\
0 && m_1 && \boldsymbol{r}_1^T && \\
\vdots && \ddots && \ddots && \ddots
\end{bmatrix}
\end{align*}
$$

in which $\boldsymbol{l}_p$ is the first column of the lower triangle of $\mathbb{L}_p$ and
$\boldsymbol{u}_p^T$ is the first row of the upper triangle of $\mathbb{U}_p$.

The process described in the above assumes no pivot permutations were necessary. If permutations
are required, they are kept track of in separate row-permution and column-permutation matrices
$\mathbb{P}$ and $\mathbb{Q}$, such that $\mathbb{P}\mathbb{M}\mathbb{Q} = \mathbb{L}\mathbb{U}$,

> which can be rewritten as

Author: so no action items?

> which can be rewritten as

Reviewer: No action item indeed. Just pointing it out since you also brought it up in another discussion. I think introducing a more detailed logic of the permutations only complicates things without adding much to it. In the end, it is just a permutation. Feel free to resolve.

\vdots    && \ddots && \vdots \\
\mathbb{M}_{N-1,0} && \cdots && \mathbb{M}_{N-1,N-1}
\end{pmatrix} \\
&\equiv \begin{pmatrix}
\begin{pmatrix}
   \mathbb{M}_{0,0}\left[0,0\right]     && \cdots && \mathbb{M}_{0,0}\left[0,N_j-1\right] \\
   \vdots                      && \ddots && \vdots \\
   \mathbb{M}_{0,0}\left[N_i-1,0\right] && \cdots && \mathbb{M}_{0,0}\left[N_i-1,N_j-1\right]
\end{pmatrix} && \cdots && \begin{pmatrix}
   \mathbb{M}_{0,N-1}\left[0,0\right]     && \cdots && \mathbb{M}_{0,N-1}\left[0,N_j-1\right] \\
   \vdots                        && \ddots && \vdots \\
   \mathbb{M}_{0,N-1}\left[N_i-1,0\right] && \cdots && \mathbb{M}_{0,N-1}\left[N_i-1,N_j-1\right] \end{pmatrix} \\
\vdots && \ddots && \vdots \\
\begin{pmatrix}
   \mathbb{M}_{N-1,0}\left[0,0\right]     && \cdots && \mathbb{M}_{N-1,0}\left[0,N_j-1\right] \\
   \vdots                        && \ddots && \vdots \\
   \mathbb{M}_{N-1,0}\left[N_i-1,0\right] && \cdots && \mathbb{M}_{N-1,0}\left[N_i-1,N_j-1\right]
\end{pmatrix} && \cdots && \begin{pmatrix}
   \mathbb{M}_{N-1,N-1}\left[0,0\right]     && \cdots && \mathbb{M}_{N-1,N-1}\left[0,N_j-1\right] \\
   \vdots                          && \ddots && \vdots \\

>    \mathbb{M}_{N-1,N-1}\left[N_i-1,0\right] && \cdots && \mathbb{M}_{N-1,N-1}\left[N_i-1,N_j-1\right] \end{pmatrix}

Reviewer: Given the above, I believe these are not necessary. But it is only an opinion, so feel free to leave as is.

Author: it's one of the easiest things to get wrong when trying to work on the core, so no harm in leaving it. I do think that this can move to its own section some time in the future, but out of scope for now

Reviewer: If within the code itself you think it gives more clarity, then let's leave it in. Resolving.

column indices per row to obtain a flattened representation of the matrix. In the last equivalence,
the column indices, in turn, are also flattened into a separate flattened representation of the
column indices and the start indices of each row - the index pointer (`indptr`). Note that the size
of `indptr` is 1 greater than the amount of rows. This enables describing the amount of elements
in each row as the difference between its element in `indptr` and the next element.

Looping over the rows and columns becomes trivial. Let $\text{indptr}$ be the start. The double loop
becomes:

1. Loop all rows: $i=0..(N-1)$:
   1. The column indices for this row start at $\text{indptr}\left[i\right]$.
   2. The column indices for this row stop at $\text{indptr}\left[i+1\right]$.
   3. Loop all columns:
      $j=\left(\text{indptr}\left[i\right]\right)..\left(\text{indptr}\left[i+1\right]\right)$:
      1. The current row index is $i$.
      2. The current column index is $j$.

### Block-sparse LU solving

Solving an equation $\mathbb{M} \boldsymbol{x} = \boldsymbol{b}$ using a
[pre-factored LU-factorization](#block-sparse-lu-factorization) is done using the regular forward

> and backward substitutions. It starts by permuting the rows:

Reviewer: This reads as if permutation was allowed accross all the blocks. Maybe add that it is only done in-block for all the blocks of the sparse matrix.

Author: better now?

Reviewer: Yes! Resolving.

$\boldsymbol{b}^{\prime} = \mathbb{P}\boldsymbol{b}$. After that, the forward substitution step
essentially amounts to solving the matrix equation
$\mathbb{L}\boldsymbol{y} = \boldsymbol{b}^{\prime}$, followed by the backwards substitution by
solving $\mathbb{U}\boldsymbol{z} = \mathbb{y}$. The final result is then obtained by applying the
column permutation: $\boldsymbol{x} = \mathbb{Q}\boldsymbol{z}$.

#### Forward substitution

The row permutation is applied as follows.

1. Loop over all block-rows: $i=0..(N-1)$:
   1. If the matrix is a block matrix:
      1. Apply the current row's block permutation:
         $\boldsymbol{b}\left[i\right] \gets \mathbb{P}\left[i\right] \cdot \boldsymbol{b}\left[i\right]$.
      2. Proceed.
   2. Else:
      1. Proceed.

> The equation $Ly = Pb$ is solved as follows.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The equation $\mathbb{L}\boldsymbol{y} = \mathbb{P}\boldsymbol{b}$ is solved as follows.
```

         2. Proceed.

Apply the column permutation as follows.

1. Loop over all block-rows: $i=0..(N-1)$:
   1. If the matrix is a block matrix:
      1. Apply the current row's block permutation:
         $\boldsymbol{b}\left[i\right] \gets \mathbb{Q}\left[i\right] \cdot \boldsymbol{b}\left[i\right]$.
      2. Proceed.
   2. Else:
      1. Proceed.

```{note}
If [pivot perturbation](#pivot-perturbation) was used to obtain the LU-decomposition, the solution
obtained here is an approximation of the exact solution. The approximation can be improved using
[iterative refinement](#iterative-refinement-of-lu-solver-solutions).
```

### Pivot perturbation

The LU-solver implemented in the power grid model has support for pivot perturbation. The methods
are described in
[Li99](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/A-Scalable-Sparse-Direct-Solver-Using-Static-Li-Demmel/7ea1c3360826ad3996f387eeb6d70815e1eb3761)
and
[Schenk06](https://etna.math.kent.edu/volumes/2001-2010/vol23/abstract.php?vol=23&pages=158-179).
Pivot perturbation consists of selecting a pivot element. If its magnitude is too small compared

> to that of the other elements in the matrix, then it cannot be used in its current form. Selecting
> another pivot element is not desirable, as described in the section on
> [pivot operations](#pivot-operations), so the matrix is ill-conditioned.

Reviewer: I would emphazise on the in-block permutations with something along the lines of:
```suggestion
to that of the other elements in the matrix, then it cannot be used in its current form. Selecting
another pivot element, via permutations with other blocks, is not desirable, as described in the section on
[pivot operations](#pivot-operations), so the matrix is ill-conditioned.
```

Instead, a small perturbation is done on the pivot element. This makes the matrix equation solvable

> without selecting a different pivot element, at the cost of propating rounding errors.

Reviewer: Typo:
```suggestion
without selecting a different pivot element, at the cost of propagating rounding errors.
```

> slightly different matrix that is then iteratively refined.

Reviewer: Maybe a brief description of why this method is chosen specifically to solve the issue is a good idea. Or point out to the papers above again.

Reviewer: Yes! Feel free to resolve.

#### Pivot perturbation algorithm

The following pivot perturbation algorithm works for both real and complex matrix equations. Let
$\mathbb{M}$ be the matrix, $\left\|\mathbb{M}\right\|_{\infty ,\text{bwod}}$ the
[block-wise off-diagonal infinite norm](#block-wise-off-diagonal-infinite-matrix-norm) of the
matrix.

1. Set $\epsilon \gets \text{perturbation_threshold} * \left\|\mathbb{M}\right\|_{\text{bwod}}$
2. If $|\text{pivot_element}| \lt \epsilon$, then:
   1. If $|\text{pivot_element}| = 0$, then:

>       1. Set $\text{direction} = 1$.

Reviewer: Nitpick: Remain direction to something more intuitive when reading the algorithm only. Maybe something like pivot_angle, or pivot_phase.

Author: i was thinking that as well, but we actually set the complex power of e of the pivot angle/phase - not the angle/phase itself. Do you have a different suggestion or do you think people will understand that it's actually it's e-power?

Reviewer: Maybe it is a good idea to point out somehow that it's e-power related and not pivot angle/phase related, as I actually mixed them up myself. So, maybe something along the lines of `complex_phase` or such?

Author: `phase_shift`?

Reviewer: That works.

[iterative refinement algorithm](#iterative-refinement-of-lu-solver-solutions):

$$
\begin{align*}
\text{backward_error}_{\text{Li}} &= \max_i \frac{\left|\boldsymbol{r}_i\right|}{\sum_j \left|\mathbb{M}_{i,j}\right| \left|\boldsymbol{x}_j\right| + \left|\boldsymbol{b}_i\right|} \\
&= \max_i \frac{\left|\boldsymbol{b}_i - \sum_j \mathbb{M}_{i,j} \boldsymbol{x}_j\right|}{\sum_j \left|\mathbb{M}_{i,j}\right| \left|\boldsymbol{x}_j\right| + \left|\boldsymbol{b}_i\right|} \\
&= \max_i \frac{\left|\boldsymbol{r}_i\right|}{\left(\left|\mathbb{M}\right| \cdot \left|\boldsymbol{x}\right| + \left|\boldsymbol{b}\right|\right)_i}
\end{align*}
$$

In this equation, the symbolic notation $\left|\mathbb{M}\right|$ and $\left|\boldsymbol{x}\right|$
are the matrix and vector with absolute values of the elements of $\mathbb{M}$ and $\boldsymbol{x}$
as elements, i.e., $\left|\mathbb{M}\right|_{i,j} := \left|\mathbb{M}_{i,j}\right|$ and
$\left|\boldsymbol{x}\right|_i := \left|\boldsymbol{x}_i\right|$, as
defined in [Arioli89](https://epubs.siam.org/doi/10.1137/0610013).

Due to aforementioned, this is prone to rounding errors, and a single row with rounding errors may

> cause the entire iterative refinement to fail. The power grid model therefore use a modified

Reviewer: ```suggestion
cause the entire iterative refinement to fail. The power grid model therefore uses a modified
```

absolute values of the residuals are relevant - not the relative values. The former is prone to
rounding errors, while the latter may hide issues in rows with small coefficients by supressing them
in the backward error, even if that row's residual is relatively large compared to the other
entries, in favor of other rows with larger absolute, but smaller relative, residuals. In
conclusion, $\epsilon$ should be chosen small, but large enough to suppress numerical instabilities.

#### Block-wise off-diagonal infinite matrix norm

For the [pivot perturbation algorithm](#pivot-perturbation-algorithm), a matrix norm is used to
determine the relative size of the current pivot element compared to the rest of the matrix as a
measure for the degree of ill-conditioning. The norm is a variant of the $L_{\infty}$ norm of a
matrix, which we call the block-wise off-diagonal infinite matrix norm
($L_{\infty ,\text{bwod}}$).

Since the power grid model solves the matrix equations using a multi-scale matrix solver (dense
intra-block, block-sparse for the full topological structure of the grid), the norm is also taken on
those same levels, so the calculation of the norm is _block-wise_.

> In addition, the diagonal blocks may have much larger elements than the off-diagonal elements, while
> the relevant information is contained mostly in the off-diagonal blocks. As a result, the
> block-diagonal elements would undesirably dominate the norm. The power grid model therefore
> restricts the calculation of the norm to _off-diagonal_ blocks.

Reviewer: I find the use of the word _element_ here missleading.
```suggestion
In addition, the diagonal blocks may have much larger elements than the off-diagonal ones, while
the relevant information is contained mostly in the off-diagonal blocks. As a result, the
block-diagonal blocks would undesirably dominate the norm. The power grid model therefore
restricts the calculation of the norm to _off-diagonal_ blocks.
```

> In short, the $L_{\infty ,\text{bwod}}$-norm it is the $L_{\infty}$ norm of the block-sparse matrix
> with the $L_{\infty}$ norm of the individual blocks as elements, where the block-diagonal elements
> are skipped at the block-level.

Reviewer: I think using the words block-diagonal elements can be missleading.
```suggestion
In short, the $L_{\infty ,\text{bwod}}$-norm it is the $L_{\infty}$ norm of the block-sparse matrix
with the $L_{\infty}$ norm of the individual blocks as elements, where the diagonal blocks are skipped.
```

         5. Continue with the next block-column.
   3. Calculate the new norm: set
      $\text{norm} \gets \max\left\{\text{norm}, \text{row_norm}\right\}$.
   4. Continue with the next block-row.

##### Illustration of the block-wise off-diagonal infinite matrix norm calculation

This section aims to illustrate how the $L_{\infty ,\text{bwod}}$-norm differs from a regular
$L_{\infty}$-norm using the following examples.

The first example shows how the taking the block-wise norm affects the calculation of the norm.

$$
\begin{pmatrix}
\begin{pmatrix}
0 && 0 \\
0 && 0
\end{pmatrix} && \begin{pmatrix}
1 && 0 \\
0 && 3
\end{pmatrix} && \begin{pmatrix}
3 && 0 \\
0 && 0
\end{pmatrix} \\
\begin{pmatrix}
5 && 0 \\
0 && 0
\end{pmatrix} &&
\begin{pmatrix}
0 && 0 \\
0 && 0
\end{pmatrix} && \begin{pmatrix}
0 && 0 \\
0 && \frac{1}{2}
\end{pmatrix} \\
\begin{pmatrix}
0 && 0 \\
0 && 0
\end{pmatrix} &&
\begin{pmatrix}
0 && 0 \\
0 && 0
\end{pmatrix} &&
\begin{pmatrix}
1 && 0 \\
0 && 1
\end{pmatrix}
\end{pmatrix}
$$

* The regular $L_{\infty}$-norm is $\max\left\{1+3, 3, 5, \frac{1}{2}, 1, 1\right\} = 5$.
* The block-wise off-diagonal infinity $L_{\infty ,\text{bwod}}$-norm is

>   $\max\left\{0+\max\left\{1, 3\right\}+\max\left\{3, 0\right\},\max\left\{5, 0\right\} + \max\left\{0, \frac{1}{2}\right\}, 1\right\} = \max\left\{3+3, 5+\frac{1}{2}, 1, 1\right\} = 6$.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  $\max\left\{\max\left\{1, 3\right\}+\max\left\{3, 0\right\},\max\left\{5, 0\right\} + \max\left\{0, \frac{1}{2}\right\}, 1\right\} = \max\left\{3+3, 5+\frac{1}{2}, 1, 1\right\} = 6$.
```

* Highly accurate and fast calculations are needed for very large grids. This means that direct
  methods are strongly preferred, and approximate methods can only be used when there is no other
  alternative, and only if they can be iteratively refined with a fast convergence rate.
* Sometimes, very many repetitive calculations are required, e.g., for time series. In those cases,
  separating the decomposition (also known as factorization) of a matrix and solving two systems of
  equations separately can give major performance boosts, because the decomposition remains the same
  across the entire set of calculations.

### Topological structure

Distribution grids consist of substations that distribute power in a region. This can be represented
in a topological way as vertices and edges. As a consequence of the locality of Kirchoff's laws,
power system equations also take on the same topological structure in block-matrix equation form.

#### Sparsity

It is common that a substation is fed by a single upstream substation, i.e., most grids are operated
in a tree-like structure. Meshed grid operations are rare, and even when they do happen, it is

> usually only for a small section of the grid. All this gives rise to extremely sparse topologies

Author: i tried incorporating your feedback while also keeping the message that some closed ring operations actually do consist of a complete ring - not just a small subsection. in that case, sparse operations cannot be used, but i did not want to explicitly mention that here because it may confuse the reader. can you please review?

and, as a result, extremely [sparse matrix equations](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Sparse_matrix)
with a [block structure](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Block_matrix).

Sparse matrix equations can be solved efficiently: they can be solved in linear time complexity, as
opposed to the cubic complexity of naive
[Gaussian elimination](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Gaussian_elimination). As a result, a sparse
matrix solver is key to the performance of the power grid model. QR-decomposition therefore is not a

> good candidate.

Reviewer 2: I don't think this is true as is.

Author: which part?

if it is about the QR decomposition statement: QR decomposition consists of an ortogonal matrix (or unitary in the complex case) and an upper-right triangle. constructing and keeping track of the ortogonal matrix requires additional fill-ins. there are so-called Givens rotations that can provide a sequence of operations that is sparsely representable, but requires typically about 2x more operations to solve the matrix. above all, it introduces even more complexity to an already complex part of the code. LU-decomposition is therefore preferred

> #### Pivot operations

Reviewer 2: What makes pivoting necessary? It appears all of a sudden. Perhaps some liaison could help.

> Pivoting of blocks is expensive, both computationally and memory-wise, as it interferes with the
> sparse block structure of the matrix equations by introducing new potentially non-zero elements,
> called _fill-ins_, during the process of
> [Gaussian elimination](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Gaussian_elimination). To this end, a pre-fixed
> permutation can be chosen to avoid bock pivoting at a later stage.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Pivoting of blocks is expensive, both time-wise and memory-wise. During the process of
[Gaussian elimination](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Gaussian_elimination), the
pivoted sparse block structure of the matrix equations is interfered with newly-introduced, potentially non-zero elements,
called _fill-ins_. To this end, a pre-fixed
permutation can be chosen to avoid bock pivoting at a later stage.
```

> The [topological structure](#topological-structure) of the grid does not change during the
> solving phase, so the permutation can be obtained by the
> [minimum degree algorithm](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Minimum_degree_algorithm) from just the
> topology alone, which seeks to minimize the amount of fill-ins. Note that matrix blocks that
> contribute topologically to the matrix equation can still contain zeros. It is possible that such
> zeros result in [ill-conditioned pivot elements](#pivot-perturbation). Handling of such
> ill-conditioned cases is discussed in the [section on pivot perturbation](#pivot-perturbation).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The [topological structure](#topological-structure) of the grid does not change during the
solving phase. The permutation can be obtained from just the
topology alone. This is typically done with the
[minimum degree algorithm](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Minimum_degree_algorithm), which seeks to minimize the amount of fill-ins. Note that matrix blocks that
contribute topologically to the matrix equation can still contain zeros. It is possible that such
zeros result in [ill-conditioned pivot elements](#pivot-perturbation). Handling of such
ill-conditioned cases is discussed in the [section on pivot perturbation](#pivot-perturbation).
```

Author: approximately incorporated. better?

### Power system equations properties

#### Matrix properties of power system equations

> [Power flow equations](../../user_manual/calculations.md#power-flow-algorithms) are not Hermitian
> and also not positive (semi-)definite. As a result, methods that depend on that property cannot be

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
[Power flow equations](../../user_manual/calculations.md#power-flow-algorithms) are not Hermitian, nor their matrices positive (semi-)definite. As a result, methods that depend on that property cannot be
```

used.

[State estimation equations](../../user_manual/calculations.md#state-estimation-algorithms) are
intrinsically positive definite and Hermitian, but for
[performance reasons](#performance-considerations), the matrix equation is augmented to achieve

> a consistent structure across the entire topology using Lagrange multipliers.

Reviewer 2: I am confused with the text and the discussions in the comment above.

Author: can you explain why? what should i add/change? i modified but maybe you can double-check if you still need more.

#### Element size properties of power system equations

> Power system equations may contain elements of several orders of magnitude. This may lead to

Reviewer 2: Can you be more specific? In which sense would the magnitude of those equations lead to the following?

Author: it's not the magnitude in itself, but the fact that it concerns several orders. "orders of magnitude" is typically used when dealing with fermi-estimates, like the argumentation of why the matrix can be ill-conditioned we use here. most algorithms are inherently unstable under skewed calculations.

Reviewer 2: Can you put the middle point version (between original and your reply) in terms of spcificity in the documentation?

Author: better?

instabilities when solving the (matrix) equations due to non-linearly propagating (rounding) errors.

> Stability checks that limit those rounding errors need to function under these extreme conditions.

Reviewer 2: This sentence appears a bit out of the blue.

Author: why? what do you propose instead? maybe something along the lines of

> As a result, the algorithms should suppress rounding error propagation under potentially extremely ill conditions.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
It is therefore essential that the solvers function under extreme conditions by limiting numerical errors and checking for stability.
```

### Block-sparsity considerations

> The power flow and state estimation equations involve block-sparse matrices: dense blocks, with a
> dimensionality varying between different calculation types, methods and symmetries, are distributed
> across the matrix in an extremely sparse way. The sparse structure can be pre-calculated, but the
> dense blocks need to be inverted separately. To make matters worse, the dense blocks may differ

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The power flow and state estimation equations involve block-sparse matrices that containing typically dense blocks. 
The dimensionality of such blocks varies between different calculation types, methods, and symmetries. The blocks are typically arranged in extremely sparse fashion. The sparse structure can be pre-calculated, but the
dense blocks need to be inverted separately. To make matters worse, the dense blocks may differ
```

heavily in structure and contents between different nodes, and are often not solvable without
pivoting.

### Custom sparse LU-solver

The choice for a custom LU-solver implementation comes from a number of considerations:

* [LU-decomposition](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/LU_decomposition) is the best choice, because
  [QR-decomposition](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/QR_decomposition) and
  [Cholesky-decomposition](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Cholesky_decomposition) cannot solve the

>   power system equations efficiently as a consequence of the properties.

Author: better?

* Alternative LU-solver implementations are optimized for a variety of use cases that are less
  sparse than the ones encountered in power systems.
* Alternative LU-solver implementations do not have good block-sparse matrix equation solvers.

## Implementation

The LU-solver implemented in the power grid model consists of 3 components:

* A block-sparse LU-solver that:

>   * handles factorization using the topological structure up to block-level

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  * handles factorization using the topological structure down to block-level
```

<!--
SPDX-FileCopyrightText: Contributors to the Power Grid Model project <powergridmodel@lfenergy.org>

SPDX-License-Identifier: MPL-2.0
-->

# LU Solver

Power system equations can be modeled as matrix equations. A matrix equation solver is therefore
key to the power grid model.

This section documents the need for a custom sparse LU-solver and its implementation.

```{contents}
```

## Background

The choice for the matrix equation solver type heavily leans on the need for
[performance](#performance-considerations), the
[topological structure](#topological-structure) of the grid, and the
[properties of the equations](#power-system-equations-properties). They are documented here.

### Performance considerations

> There is a large variety of applications of the power grid model that requires high performance.

Author: i originally wrote it as such, but jerry correctly pointed out that grammatically, `that` (being singular) points to `variety` and therefore `requires` should also be singular

and symmetries. The blocks are typically arranged in extremely sparse fashion. The sparse structure
can be pre-calculated, but the dense blocks need to be inverted separately. To make matters worse,
the dense blocks may differ heavily in structure and contents between different nodes, and are often
not solvable without pivoting.

### Custom sparse LU-solver

The choice for a custom LU-solver implementation comes from a number of considerations:

* [LU-decomposition](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/LU_decomposition) is the best choice, because
  [QR-decomposition](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/QR_decomposition) and
  [Cholesky-decomposition](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Cholesky_decomposition) cannot solve the
  power system equations efficiently as a consequence of the
  [power system equations' properties](#power-system-equations-properties),
  as the QR-decomposition is not as efficient when dealing with sparse matrices, while the latter
  requires Hermitian and/or semi-definite (in generalized form).
* Alternative LU-solver implementations are optimized for a variety of use cases that are less
  sparse than the ones encountered in power systems.

> * Alternative LU-solver implementations do not have good block-sparse matrix equation solvers.

Author: good one

obtained here is an approximation of the exact solution. The approximation can be improved using
[iterative refinement](#iterative-refinement-of-lu-solver-solutions).
```

### Pivot perturbation

The LU-solver implemented in the power grid model has support for pivot perturbation. The methods
are described in
[Li99](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/A-Scalable-Sparse-Direct-Solver-Using-Static-Li-Demmel/7ea1c3360826ad3996f387eeb6d70815e1eb3761)
and
[Schenk06](https://etna.math.kent.edu/volumes/2001-2010/vol23/abstract.php?vol=23&pages=158-179).
Pivot perturbation consists of selecting a pivot element. If its magnitude is too small compared
to that of the other elements in the matrix, then it cannot be used in its current form. Selecting
another pivot element, via permutations with other blocks, is not desirable, as described in the
section on [pivot operations](#pivot-operations), so the matrix is ill-conditioned.

Instead, a small perturbation is done on the pivot element. This makes the matrix equation solvable
without selecting a different pivot element, at the cost of propagating rounding errors.

> slightly different matrix that is then iteratively refined. This method is also used by

Author: combined the two... the iterative refinement part is important. can you double-check?

contains an early-out criterion for the
[iterative refinement](#iterative-refinement-of-lu-solver-solutions) that checks for deminishing
returns in consecutive iterations. It amounts to (in reverse order):

1. If $\text{backward_error} \gt \frac{1}{2}\text{last_backward_error}$, then:
   1. Stop iterative refinement.
2. Else:
   1. Go to next refinement iteration.

In power systems, however, the fact that the matrix may contain elements
[spanning several orders of magnitude](#element-size-properties-of-power-system-equations) may cause
slow convergence far away from the optimum. The diminishing return criterion would cause the
algorithm to exit before the actual solution is found. Multiple refinement iterations may still
yield better results. The power grid model therefore does not stop on deminishing returns. Instead,
a maximum amount of iterations is used in combination with the error tolerance.

#### Improved backward error calculation

In power system equations, the matrix equation $\mathbb{M} \boldsymbol{x} = \boldsymbol{b}$ can be
very unbalanced: some entries in the matrix $\mathbb{M}$ may be very large while others are zero or

> very small. The same may be true for the right-hand side of the equation $\boldsymbol{b}$, as well

Author: do you think citing the PF algorithms in the PGM docs (https://power-grid-model.readthedocs.io/en/stable/user_manual/calculations.html#power-flow-algorithms) is sufficient?

> very small. The same may be true for the right-hand side of the equation $\boldsymbol{b}$, as well

Reviewer: I like that, makes it more self contained. Also, we don't need to grind every detail to the smallest bits. Please resolve once done :)

cause the entire iterative refinement to fail. The power grid model therefore uses a modified
version, in which the denominator is capped to a minimum value, determined by the maximum across all
denominators:

$$
\begin{align*}
D_{\text{max}} &= \max_i\left\{\left(\left|\mathbb{M}\right|\cdot\left|\boldsymbol{x}\right| + \left|\boldsymbol{b}\right|\right)_i\right\} \\
\text{backward_error} &= \max_i \left\{
   \frac{\left|\boldsymbol{r}\right|_i}{
      \max\left\{
         \left(\left|\mathbb{M}\right|\cdot\left|\boldsymbol{x}\right| + \left|\boldsymbol{b}\right|\right)_i,
         \epsilon_{\text{backward_error}} D_{\text{max}}
      \right\}
   }
\right\}
\end{align*}
$$

$\epsilon$ may be chosen. $\epsilon = 0$ means no cut-off, while $\epsilon = 1$ means that only the
absolute values of the residuals are relevant - not the relative values. The former is prone to
rounding errors, while the latter may hide issues in rows with small coefficients by supressing them
in the backward error, even if that row's residual is relatively large compared to the other
entries, in favor of other rows with larger absolute, but smaller relative, residuals. In

> conclusion, $\epsilon$ should be chosen small, but large enough to suppress numerical instabilities.

Author: added a reference instead. i had it originally like that, but found it weird to have the implementation separated from the experimental value.

yet. In addition, $m_p$ is the pivot element value, $\boldsymbol{q}$ and $\boldsymbol{r}_p^T$ are
the associated column and row vectors containing the rest of the pivot column and row and
$\hat{\mathbb{M}}_p$ is the bottom-right block of the matrix. Note that in the bigger picture of the
full matrix, this looks as follows, where $\boldsymbol{l}_k$ and $\boldsymbol{u}_k$ are column and
row vectors, respectively, and the $m_k$, $\boldsymbol{l}_k$ and $\boldsymbol{u}_k$ ($k < p$) denote
sections of the matrix that already have been decomposed in previous iteration steps (see below).

$$
\begin{bmatrix}
    m_0 && \boldsymbol{u}_0^T && && \\
    \boldsymbol{l}_0 && \ddots && \ddots && \\
    && \ddots && \ddots && \boldsymbol{u}_{p-1}^T \\
    && && \boldsymbol{l}_{p-1} && \mathbb{M}_p
\end{bmatrix}\equiv\begin{bmatrix}
    m_0 && \boldsymbol{u}_0^T && && && \\
    \boldsymbol{l}_0 && \ddots && \ddots && && \\
    && \ddots && m_{p-1} && \boldsymbol{u}_{p-1}^T && \\
    && && \boldsymbol{l}_{p-1} && m_p && \boldsymbol{r}_p^T \\
    && && && \boldsymbol{q}_p && \hat{\mathbb{M}}_p\end{bmatrix}
$$

[Gaussian elimination](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Gaussian_elimination) using

> [LU-decomposition](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/LU_decomposition) constructs the matrices

Reviewer 2: Redundancy as mentioned in the other comment(s). I leave this up to you then, feel free to keep them.

$$
\begin{align*}
\mathbb{L}_p &= \begin{bmatrix} 1 && \boldsymbol{0}^T \\ m_p^{-1} \boldsymbol{q}_p && \mathbb{1}_p\end{bmatrix} \\
\mathbb{U}_p &= \begin{bmatrix} m_p && \boldsymbol{r}_p^T \\\boldsymbol{0} && \mathbb{1}_p\end{bmatrix} \\
\mathbb{M}_{p+1} &= \hat{\mathbb{M}}_p - m_p^{-1} \boldsymbol{q}_p \boldsymbol{r}_p^T
\end{align*}
$$

> where $\mathbb{1}$ is the matrix with ones on the diagonal and zeros as off-diagonal elements and
> $\mathbb{M}_{p+1}$ is the start of the next iteration. They together form the LU-decomposition as
> 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
where $\mathbb{1}$ is the matrix with ones on the diagonal and zeros off-diagonal, and
$\mathbb{M}_{p+1}$ is the start of the next iteration. We can then write the relationship of $\mathbb{L}$, $\mathbb{U}$, $\mathbb{M}_{p+1}$ and $\mathbb{M}_{p}$ as:
```

$$
\mathbb{M}_p \equiv
\begin{bmatrix} 1 && \boldsymbol{0}^T \\ m_p^{-1} \boldsymbol{q}_p && \mathbb{1}_p\end{bmatrix}\begin{bmatrix}
    1 && \boldsymbol{0}^T \\
    \boldsymbol{0} && \hat{\mathbb{M}}_p - m_p^{-1} \boldsymbol{q}_p \boldsymbol{r}_p^T
\end{bmatrix}\begin{bmatrix} m_p && \boldsymbol{r}_p^T \\\boldsymbol{0} && \mathbb{1}_p\end{bmatrix}
\equiv \mathbb{L}_p \begin{bmatrix}
    1 && \boldsymbol{0}^T \\
    \boldsymbol{0} && \mathbb{M}_{p+1}
\end{bmatrix} \mathbb{U}_p

> $$

Reviewer 2: I see that I had multiple comment on the trailing ., Sorry for not responding to your comment in time while still pumping out such comments. They were just one recommended way from ams because that makes the equations part of the text. Of course there are others that recommends otherwise.

> or, with the previous iteration also shown,

Reviewer 2: This extended step is not optional giving context below.
```suggestion
If we expand one more step, we get:
```

> or, with the previous iteration also shown,
> 
> $$
> \mathbb{M}_{p-1} \equiv \mathbb{L}_{p-1} \begin{bmatrix}
>     1 && \boldsymbol{0}^T \\
>     \boldsymbol{0} && \mathbb{L}_p
> \end{bmatrix}\begin{bmatrix}
>     1 && 0 && \boldsymbol{0}^T \\
>     0 && 1 && \boldsymbol{0}^T \\
>     \boldsymbol{0} && \boldsymbol{0} && \mathbb{M}_{p+1}
> \end{bmatrix} \begin{bmatrix}
>     1 && \boldsymbol{0}^T \\
>     \boldsymbol{0} && \mathbb{U}_p
> \end{bmatrix}\mathbb{U}_{p-1}
> $$
> 
> in which $\mathbb{L}_{p-1}$ and $\mathbb{U}_{p-1}$ have dimensions
> $\left(N-p+1\right)\times \left(N-p+1\right)$, $\mathbb{L}_p$ and $\mathbb{U}_p$ have dimensions
> $\left(N-p\right) \times \left(N-p\right)$, and $\mathbb{M}_{p+1}$ has dimensions
> $\left(N-p-1\right) \times \left(N-p-1\right)$.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion

```

Reviewer 2: It only felt to me redundant. If we don't strive for a concise piece of text we can indeed keep it.

\begin{align*}
\mathbb{L} = \begin{bmatrix}
1 && 0 && \cdots && 0 \\
\left(\boldsymbol{l}_0\right)_0 && \ddots && \ddots && \vdots \\
\vdots && \ddots && 1 && 0 \\
\left(\boldsymbol{l}_0\right)_{N-p-2} && \cdots && \left(\boldsymbol{l}_{N-2}\right)_0 && 1
\end{bmatrix} &= \begin{bmatrix}
1 && 0 && \cdots && 0 \\
m_0^{-1} \left(\boldsymbol{q}_0\right)_0 && \ddots && \ddots && \vdots \\
\vdots && \ddots && 1 && 0 \\
m_0^{-1} \left(\boldsymbol{q}_0\right)_{N-p-2} && \cdots && m_{N-2}^{-1} \left(\boldsymbol{q}_{N-2}\right)_0 && 1
\end{bmatrix} \\
\mathbb{U} = \begin{bmatrix}
m_0 && \left(\boldsymbol{u}_0^T\right)_0 && \cdots && \left(\boldsymbol{u}_0^T\right)_{N-p-2} \\
0 && \ddots && \ddots && \vdots \\
\vdots && \ddots && m_{N-2} && \left(\boldsymbol{u}_{N-2}^T\right)_0 \\
0 && \cdots && 0 && m_{N-1}
\end{bmatrix} &= \begin{bmatrix}
m_0 && \left(\boldsymbol{r}_0^T\right)_0 && \cdots && \left(\boldsymbol{r}_0^T\right)_{N-p-2} \\
0 && \ddots && \ddots && \vdots \\
\vdots && \ddots && m_{N-2} && \left(\boldsymbol{r}_{N-2}^T\right)_0 \\
0 && \cdots && 0 && m_{N-1}
\end{bmatrix}
\end{align*}
$$

in which $\boldsymbol{l}_p$ is the first column of the lower triangle of $\mathbb{L}_p$ and

> $\boldsymbol{u}_p^T$ is the first row of the upper triangle of $\mathbb{U}_p$.

Reviewer 2: This whole section needs rewriting. $p$ is a dummy variable and it should not appear in the final form. Tried really hard to write down the complete suggestion, had to give up due to headache.

The process described in the above assumes no pivot permutations were necessary. If permutations
are required, they are kept track of in separate row-permution and column-permutation matrices
$\mathbb{P}$ and $\mathbb{Q}$, such that $\mathbb{P}\mathbb{M}\mathbb{Q} = \mathbb{L}\mathbb{U}$,
which can be rewritten as

$$
\mathbb{M} = \mathbb{P}^{-1}\mathbb{L}\mathbb{U}\mathbb{Q}^{-1}
$$

> #### Dense LU-factorization algorithm

Reviewer 2: Where is the explanation of perturbation?

> The power grid model uses an in-place approach. Permutations are separately stored.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The power grid model uses an in-place LU decomposition approach. Permutations are separately stored. Below is the algorithm of LU decomposition with pivot perturbation used in the power grid model.
```

> Let $\mathbb{M}$ be the $N\times N$-matrix and
> $\mathbb{M}\left[i,j\right]$ its element at (0-based) indices $(i,j)$, where $i,j = 0..(N-1)$.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Let $\mathbb{M}$ be the $N\times N$-matrix and
$\mathbb{M}\left[i,j\right]$ its element at (0-based) indices $(i,j)$, where $i,j = 0..(N-1)$. We denote the range slicing operation of a dimension of matrix $\mathbb{M}$ as $$\mathbb{M}[0:3, j]$.
```

1. Initialize the permutations $\mathbb{P}$ and $\mathbb{Q}$ to the identity permutation.
2. Initialize fill-in elements to $0$.
3. Loop over all rows: $p = 0..(N-1)$:
   1. Set the remaining matrix: $\mathbb{M}_p \gets \mathbb{M}\left[p:N,p:N\right]$ with size

>       $N_p\times N_p$.

Reviewer 2: What is $N_p$?

         1. Apply [pivot perturbation](#pivot-perturbation).
         2. Proceed.
      2. Else, if the matrix is singular (pivot element is identically $0$), then:
         1. Raise a `SparseMatrixError`.
      3. Else:
         1. Proceed.
   4. Else:
      1. Proceed.
   5. Swap the first and pivot row and column of $\mathbb{M}_p$, so that the pivot element is in the
      top-left corner of the remaining matrix:
      1. $\mathbb{M}_p\left[0,0:N_p\right] \leftrightarrow \mathbb{M}\left[i_p,0:N_p\right]$
      2. $\mathbb{M}_p\left[0:N_p,0\right] \leftrightarrow \mathbb{M}\left[0:N_p,j_p\right]$
   6. Apply Gaussian elimination for the current pivot element:
      1. $\mathbb{M}_p\left[0,0:N_p\right] \gets \frac{1}{\mathbb{M}_p[0,0]}\mathbb{M}_p\left[0,0:N_p\right]$
      2. $\mathbb{M}_p\left[1:N_p,0:N_p\right] \gets \mathbb{M}_p\left[1:N_p,0:N_p\right] - \mathbb{M}_p\left[1:N_p,0\right] \otimes \mathbb{M}_p\left[0,0:N_p\right]$
   7. Accumulate the permutation matrices:
      1. In $\mathbb{P}$: swap $p \leftrightarrow p + i_p$
      2. In $\mathbb{Q}$: swap $p \leftrightarrow p + j_p$
   8. Continue with the next $p$ to factorize the the bottom-right block.

> $\mathbb{L}$ is now the matrix composed of ones on the diagonal and the bottom-left off-diagonal
> triangle of $\mathbb{M}$ and zeros in the upper-right off-diagonal triangle. $\mathbb{U}$ is the
> matrix composed of the upper-right triangle of $\mathbb{M}$ including the diagonal elements and
> zeros in the lower-left off-diagonal triangle.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
$\mathbb{L}$ now contains ones on the diagonal and zeros in the upper-right off-diagonal triangle. In the bottom-left off-diagonal triangle, it contains the bottom-left off-diagonal triangle of $\mathbb{M}$.
$\mathbb{U}$ is the
matrix composed of the upper-right triangle of $\mathbb{M}$ including the diagonal elements and
zeros in the lower-left off-diagonal triangle.
```

Author: $\mathbb{L}$ and $\mathbb{U}$ don't actually exist in the code base: they are meta-objects composed of in-place elements and virtual elements. I tried incorporating your feedback, while still keeping the original intention.

```{note}

> In the actual implementation, we use a slightly different order of operations: instead of raising
> the `SparseMatrixError` immediately, we break from the loop and throw after that. This does not
> change the functional behavior.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In the actual implementation, we break from the loop first and throw afterwards, instead of raising the `SparseMatrixError` immediately.
```

Author: approximately incorporated

```

```{note}

> Permutations are only allowed within each dense block, for the reasons described
> [earlier](#pivot-operations).
> ```

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Permutations are only allowed within each dense block, for the reasons described
[later](#pivot-operations).
```
```

Author: incorrect. this points at the section on pivot operations which is at the start of this document

> ### Block-sparse LU-factorization

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
### Block-sparse LU factorization
```

[dense LU-factorization process](#dense-lu-factorization-process) is followed but on blocks instead
of single elements. Let
$\mathbb{M}_p\equiv\begin{bmatrix}\mathbb{m}_p && \pmb{\mathbb{r}}_p^T \\ \pmb{\mathbb{q}}_p && \hat{\pmb{\mathbb{M}}}_p\end{bmatrix}$
be the block-sparse matrix to decompose. $\mathbb{m}_p$ is a dense block that can be
[LU-factorized](#dense-lu-factorization-process):
$\mathbb{m}_p = \mathbb{p}_p^{-1} \mathbb{l}_p \mathbb{u}_p \mathbb{q}_p^{-1}$, where
the lower-case helps avoiding confusion with the block-sparse matrix components. [Gaussian
elimination](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Gaussian_elimination) using
[LU-decomposition](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/LU_decomposition) constructs the matrices

$$
\begin{align*}
\mathbb{L}_p &= \begin{bmatrix} 1 && \pmb{\mathbb{0}}^T \\ \overrightarrow{\mathbb{m}_p^{-1}\pmb{\mathbb{q}}_p} && \pmb{\mathbb{1}}_p\end{bmatrix} \\
\mathbb{U}_p &= \begin{bmatrix} \mathbb{m}_p && \pmb{\mathbb{r}}_p^T \\ \pmb{\mathbb{0}} && \pmb{\mathbb{1}}_p \end{bmatrix} \\
\pmb{\mathbb{M}}_{p+1} &= \hat{\pmb{\mathbb{{M}}}}_p - \widehat{\mathbb{m}_p^{-1}\pmb{\mathbb{q}}_p \pmb{\mathbb{r}}_p^T}
\end{align*}
$$

> Here, $\overrightarrow{\mathbb{m}_p^{-1}\pmb{\mathbb{q}}_p}$ is symbolic notation for the
> block-vector of solutions of the equation $\mathbb{m}_p x_{p;k} = \mathbb{q}_{p;k}$, where
> $k = 0..(p-1)$. Similarly, $\widehat{\mathbb{m}_p^{-1}\pmb{\mathbb{q}}_p \pmb{\mathbb{r}}_p^T}$ is
> symbolic notation for the block-matrix of solutions of the equation
> $\mathbb{m}_p x_{p;k,l} = \mathbb{q}_{p;k} \mathbb{r}_{p;l}^T$, where
> $k,l = 0..(p-1)$. That is:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Here, $\overrightarrow{\mathbb{m}_p^{-1}\pmb{\mathbb{q}}_p}$ is symbolic notation for the
block-vector of solutions to the equation $\mathbb{m}_p x_{p;k} = \mathbb{q}_{p;k}$, where
$k = 0..(p-1)$. Similarly, $\widehat{\mathbb{m}_p^{-1}\pmb{\mathbb{q}}_p \pmb{\mathbb{r}}_p^T}$ is
symbolic notation for the block-matrix of solutions to the equation
$\mathbb{m}_p x_{p;k,l} = \mathbb{q}_{p;k} \mathbb{r}_{p;l}^T$, where
$k,l = 0..(p-1)$. That is:
```

$$
\begin{align*}
\overrightarrow{\mathbb{m}_p^{-1}\pmb{\mathbb{q}}_p}
&= \begin{bmatrix}\mathbb{m}_p^{-1}\pmb{\mathbb{q}}_{p;0} \\
\vdots \\

> \mathbb{m}_p^{-1} \pmb{\mathbb{q}}_{p;N-1} \end{bmatrix} \\

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
\mathbb{m}_p^{-1} \pmb{\mathbb{q}}_{p;N-1} \end{bmatrix}, \\
```

\widehat{\mathbb{m}_p^{-1}\pmb{\mathbb{q}}_p \pmb{\mathbb{r}}_p^T}
&= \begin{bmatrix}\mathbb{m}_p^{-1} \pmb{\mathbb{q}}_{p;0} \pmb{\mathbb{r}}_{p;0}^T && \cdots &&
\mathbb{m}_p^{-1} \pmb{\mathbb{q}}_{p;0} \pmb{\mathbb{r}}_{p;N-1}^T \\
\vdots && \ddots && \vdots \\
\mathbb{m}_p^{-1} \pmb{\mathbb{q}}_{p;0} \pmb{\mathbb{r}}_{p;0}^T && \cdots &&

> \mathbb{m}_p^{-1} \pmb{\mathbb{q}}_{p;N-1} \pmb{\mathbb{r}}_{p;N-1}^T \end{bmatrix}

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
\mathbb{m}_p^{-1} \pmb{\mathbb{q}}_{p;N-1} \pmb{\mathbb{r}}_{p;N-1}^T \end{bmatrix}.
```

\end{align*}
$$

Iteratively applying above factorization process yields $\mathbb{L}$ and $\mathbb{U}$, as well as
$\mathbb{P}$ and $\mathbb{Q}$.

> Unfortunately, obtaining $\mathbb{m}_p^{-1} \boldsymbol{x}_p$ is numerically unstable, even if it

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Unfortunately, the process of obtaining $\mathbb{m}_p^{-1} \boldsymbol{x}_p$ can be numerically unstable, even if it
```

is split into multiple solving steps. Instead, the process below is used.

##### Partially solved block-sparse LU-factorization process

> A more numerically stable approach compared to the
> [naive approach](#naive-block-sparse-lu-factorization-process) is equivalent to single-element

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
A more numerically stable approach compared to the
[naïve approach](#naive-block-sparse-lu-factorization-process) is equivalent to single-element
```

> pivot. Here, we describe the results. Instead of applying the full pivot decomposition in the
> $L$-matrix and delaying the solve process all the way to after the solving phase, we only apply a
> partial pivot to the $L$ matrix, and the other half in the $U$ matrix. This is equivalent to single-
> element pivoting instead of block-pivoting. For the
> [rationale](#rationale-of-the-block-sparse-lu-factorization-process) and
> [proof](#proof-of-block-sparse-lu-factorization-process), see below. Here, only the results are
> presented.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
pivot. Instead of applying decomposition with full pivoting in the
$L$ matrix and delaying the solve process all until the final solving phase, we only apply a
partial pivoting step to both the $L$ matrix and the $U$ matrix. This is equivalent to single-
element pivoting without block-pivoting. In the following section, we provide the
[rationale](#rationale-of-the-block-sparse-lu-factorization-process) and
[proof](#proof-of-block-sparse-lu-factorization-process). 
```

> Using the same conventions as [before](#naive-block-sparse-lu-factorization-process), Let

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Following the same conventions as [above](#naive-block-sparse-lu-factorization-process), let
```

$\mathbb{M}_p\equiv\begin{bmatrix}\mathbb{m}_p && \pmb{\mathbb{r}}_p^T \\ \pmb{\mathbb{q}}_p && \hat{\pmb{\mathbb{M}}}_p\end{bmatrix}$
be the block-sparse matrix to decompose. $\mathbb{m}_p$ is a dense block that can be

> [LU-factorized](#dense-lu-factorization-process):

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
[LU factorized](#dense-lu-factorization-process):
```

$\mathbb{m}_p = \mathbb{p}_p^{-1} \mathbb{l}_p \mathbb{u}_p \mathbb{q}_p^{-1}$. Partial Gaussian

> elimination constructs the matrices

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
elimination constructs the following matrices:
```

$$
\begin{align*}
\mathbb{L}_p &= \begin{bmatrix} \mathbb{l}_p && \pmb{\mathbb{0}}^T \\ \overrightarrow{\pmb{\mathbb{q}}_p\mathbb{q}_p\mathbb{u}_p^{-1}} && \pmb{\mathbb{1}}_p\end{bmatrix} \\
\mathbb{U}_p &= \begin{bmatrix} \mathbb{u}_p && \overrightarrow{\mathbb{l}_p\mathbb{p}_p\pmb{\mathbb{r}}_p}^T \\ \pmb{\mathbb{0}} && \pmb{\mathbb{1}}_p \end{bmatrix} \\
\pmb{\mathbb{M}}_{p+1} &= \hat{\pmb{\mathbb{{M}}}}_p - \widehat{\pmb{\mathbb{q}}_p\mathbb{q}_p\mathbb{u}_p^{-1}\mathbb{l}_p^{-1}\mathbb{p}_p\pmb{\mathbb{r}}_p^T}
\end{align*}
$$

Note that the first column of $\mathbb{L}_p$ can be obtained by applying a right-solve procedure,

> instead of the regular left-solve procedure, as is the case for the $\mathbb{U}_p$.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
instead of the regular left-solve procedure, as is the case for $\mathbb{U}_p$.
```

    a_{22} - a_{12} \frac{a_{21}}{a_{11}} &&
    b_{21} - b_{11}\frac{a_{21}}{a_{11}} &&
    b_{22} - b_{12}\frac{a_{21}}{a_{11}} \\
\frac{c_{11}}{a_{11}} &&
    \frac{c_{12} - a_{12} \frac{c_{11}}{a_{11}}}{a_{22} - a_{12} \frac{a_{21}}{a_{11}}} &&
    d_{11} - b_{11}\frac{c_{11}}{a_{11}} - \left(b_{21} - b_{11}\frac{a_{21}}{a_{11}}\right) \frac{c_{12} - a_{12} \frac{c_{11}}{a_{11}}}{a_{22} - a_{12} \frac{a_{21}}{a_{11}}} &&
    d_{12} - b_{12}\frac{c_{11}}{a_{11}} - \left(b_{22} - b_{12}\frac{a_{21}}{a_{11}}\right) \frac{c_{12} - a_{12} \frac{c_{11}}{a_{11}}}{a_{22} - a_{12} \frac{a_{21}}{a_{11}}}  \\
\frac{c_{21}}{a_{11}} &&
    \frac{c_{22} - a_{12} \frac{c_{21}}{a_{11}}}{a_{22} - a_{12} \frac{a_{21}}{a_{11}}} &&
    d_{21} - b_{11}\frac{c_{21}}{a_{11}} - \left(b_{21} - b_{11}\frac{a_{21}}{a_{11}}\right) \frac{c_{22} - a_{12} \frac{c_{21}}{a_{11}}}{a_{22} - a_{12} \frac{a_{21}}{a_{11}}} &&
    d_{22} - b_{12}\frac{c_{21}}{a_{11}} - \left(b_{22} - b_{12}\frac{a_{21}}{a_{11}}\right) \frac{c_{22} - a_{12} \frac{c_{21}}{a_{11}}}{a_{22} - a_{12} \frac{a_{21}}{a_{11}}}
\end{bmatrix}
\end{align*}
$$

Using the following denotations, we can simplify the above as

> $\begin{bmatrix} mathbb{l}_a \mathbb{u}_a && \mathbb{u}_b \\ mathbb{l}_c && \mathbb{l}_d \mathbb{u}_d \end{bmatrix}$.

Author: whoops

#### Pivot perturbation algorithm

The following pivot perturbation algorithm works for both real and complex matrix equations. Let
$\mathbb{M}$ be the matrix, $\left\|\mathbb{M}\right\|_{\infty ,\text{bwod}}$ the
[block-wise off-diagonal infinite norm](#block-wise-off-diagonal-infinite-matrix-norm) of the
matrix.

1. Set $\epsilon \gets \text{perturbation_threshold} * \left\|\mathbb{M}\right\|_{\text{bwod}}$
2. If $|\text{pivot_element}| \lt \epsilon$, then:
   1. If $|\text{pivot_element}| = 0$, then:
      1. Set $\text{phase_shift} = 1$.
      2. Proceed.
   2. Else:
      1. Set $\text{phase_shift}\left(\text{pivot_element}\right) \gets \text{pivot_element} / |\text{pivot_element}|$.
      2. Proceed.
   3. Set $\text{pivot_element} \gets \epsilon * \text{phase_shift}\left(\text{pivot_element}\right)$.

$\text{phase_shift}$ ensures that the complex phase of the pivot element is preserved, with a fallback
to the positive real axis when the pivot element is identically zero.

### Iterative refinement of LU solver solutions

> This algorithm is heavily inspired by the GESP algorithm described in

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The following refinement algorithm draws substantial inspiration from the GESP algorithm described in
```

[Li99](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/A-Scalable-Sparse-Direct-Solver-Using-Static-Li-Demmel/7ea1c3360826ad3996f387eeb6d70815e1eb3761).

> [LU solving](#block-sparse-lu-solving) with an [LU decomposition](#block-sparse-lu-factorization)
> obtained using [pivot perturbation](#pivot-perturbation) yields only approximate results, because
> the LU decomposition itself is only approximate. Because of that, an iterative refinement process
> is required to improve the solution to the matrix equation $\mathbb{M} \cdot \boldsymbol{x} = \boldsymbol{b}$.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```
Redundant.

> The iterative refinement process is as follows: in iteration step $i$, it assumes an existing
> approximation $\boldsymbol{x}_i$ for $\boldsymbol{x}$. It then defines the difference between the
> current best and the actual solution $\boldsymbol{\Delta x} = \boldsymbol{x} - \boldsymbol{x}_i$.
> Substituting in the original equation yields
> $\mathbb{M} \cdot (\boldsymbol{x}_i + \boldsymbol{\Delta x}) = \boldsymbol{b}$, so that
> $\mathbb{M} \cdot \boldsymbol{\Delta x} = \boldsymbol{b} - \mathbb{M} \cdot \boldsymbol{x}_i =: \boldsymbol{r}$, where the residual
> $\boldsymbol{r}$ can be calculated. An estimation for the left-hand side can be obtained by using
> the pivot-perturbed matrix $\tilde{A}$ instead of the original matrix A. Convergence can be reached
> if $\boldsymbol{r} \to \boldsymbol{0}$, since then also
> $\left\|\boldsymbol{\Delta x}\right\| \to 0$. Solving for $\boldsymbol{\Delta x}$ and substituting
> back into $\boldsymbol{x}_{i+1} = \boldsymbol{x}_i + \boldsymbol{\Delta x}$ provides the next best
> approximation $\boldsymbol{x}_{i+1}$ for $\boldsymbol{x}$.

Reviewer 2: I am not sure if the steps described here is completely clear as is. What is the `original matrix A`?
```suggestion
The iterative refinement process works as follows. In step $i$, given an
approximation $\boldsymbol{x}_i$ for $\boldsymbol{x}$, the difference between the
current best and the actual solution is defined as $\boldsymbol{\Delta x} = \boldsymbol{x} - \boldsymbol{x}_i$.
Substituting in the original equation yields
$\mathbb{M} \cdot (\boldsymbol{x}_i + \boldsymbol{\Delta x}) = \boldsymbol{b}$, so that
$\mathbb{M} \cdot \boldsymbol{\Delta x} = \boldsymbol{b} - \mathbb{M} \cdot \boldsymbol{x}_i =: \boldsymbol{r}$. The residual
$\boldsymbol{r}$ can be calculated. An estimation for the left-hand side can be obtained by using
the pivot-perturbed matrix $\tilde{A}$ instead of the original matrix. Convergence is reached
when $\boldsymbol{r} \to \boldsymbol{0}$, which implies
$\left\|\boldsymbol{\Delta x}\right\| \to 0$. Solving for $\boldsymbol{\Delta x}$ and substituting
back into $\boldsymbol{x}_{i+1} = \boldsymbol{x}_i + \boldsymbol{\Delta x}$ provides the next 
approximation $\boldsymbol{x}_{i+1}$ for $\boldsymbol{x}$.
```

A measure for the quality of the approximation is given by the $\text{backward_error}$ (see also
[backward error formula](#backward-error-calculation)).

> Since the matrix $\mathbb{M}$ does not change during this process, the LU decomposition remains
> valid throughout the process, so that this iterative refinement can be done at a reasonably low
> cost.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Since the matrix $\mathbb{M}$ remains static during this process, the LU decomposition is
valid throughout the process. The accuracy of the result can therefore be iteratively refined efficiently.
```

   3. Set the initial backward error: $\text{backward_error} = \infty$.
   4. Set the number of iterations to 0.
2. Iteratively refine; loop:
   1. Check stop criteria:
      1. If $\text{backward_error} \leq \epsilon$, then:
         1. Convergence reached: stop the refinement process.
      2. Else, if the number of iterations > maximum allowed amount of iterations, then:
         1. Convergence not reached; iterative refinement not possible: raise a sparse matrix
            error.
      3. Else:
         1. Increase the number of iterations.
         2. Proceed.
   2. Solve $\tilde{\mathbb{M}} \cdot \boldsymbol{\Delta x} = \boldsymbol{r}$ for
      $\boldsymbol{\Delta x}$.
   3. Calculate the backward error with the original $\boldsymbol{x}$ and $\boldsymbol{r}$ using the
      [backward error formula](#improved-backward-error-calculation).
   4. Set the next estimation of
      $\boldsymbol{x}$: $\boldsymbol{x}_{\text{est}} \gets \boldsymbol{x}_{\text{est}} + \boldsymbol{\Delta x}$.
   5. Set the residual: $\boldsymbol{r} \gets \boldsymbol{b} - \mathbb{M} \cdot \boldsymbol{x}$.

As a result, we effectively always do:

> 1. A solve step; and
> 2. At least one iterative refinement step.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
1. A solving step; and
2. At least one refinement step.
```

> The reason a sparse matrix error is raised, and not an iteration diverge error, when the maximum
> allowed amount of iterations is exceeded, is the following. It is the iterative refinement of the
> matrix equation solution that cannot be solved in the set amount of iterations - not the set of
> power system equations. This will only happen when the matrix equation requires iterative refinement

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
When the maximum allowed amount of iterations is exceeded, a sparse matrix error instead of an iteration diverge error is raised. The reason is that it is the iterative refinement of the
matrix equation solution that cannot be solved in the set amount of iterations - not the set of
power system equations. This will only happen when the matrix equation requires iterative refinement
```

in the first place, which happens only when pivot perturbation is needed, namely in the case of an
ill-conditioned matrix equation. A matrix equation that is both ill-conditioned and not iteratively
refinable is underdetermined and cannot be solved.

#### Backward error calculation

The [iterative refinement algorithm](#iterative-refinement-of-lu-solver-solutions) uses a backward
error as a convergence criterion. We use the following backward error calculation, inspired by
[Li99](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/A-Scalable-Sparse-Direct-Solver-Using-Static-Li-Demmel/7ea1c3360826ad3996f387eeb6d70815e1eb3761),
with a few modifications described [below](#improved-backward-error-calculation).

$$
\begin{align*}
D_{\text{max}} &= \max_i\left\{\left(\left|\mathbb{M}\right|\cdot\left|\boldsymbol{x}\right| + \left|\boldsymbol{b}\right|\right)_i\right\} \\
\text{backward_error} &= \max_i \left\{
   \frac{\left|\boldsymbol{r}\right|_i}{
      \max\left\{
         \left(\left|\mathbb{M}\right|\cdot\left|\boldsymbol{x}\right| + \left|\boldsymbol{b}\right|\right)_i,
         \epsilon_{\text{backward_error}} D_{\text{max}}
      \right\}
   }
\right\}
\end{align*}
$$

> $0 \leq \epsilon \leq 1$ is a value that introduces a

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
$\epsilon \in \left[ 0, 1 \right]$ is a value that introduces a
```

[cut-off value to improve stability](#improved-backward-error-calculation) of the algorithm and
should ideally be small.

```{note}
$\epsilon = 10^{-4}$ was experimentally determined to be a reasonably good value on a number of

> real-world MV grids.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
real-world medium voltage grids.
```

```

### Differences with literature

There are several differences between our implementation and the ones described in
[Li99](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/A-Scalable-Sparse-Direct-Solver-Using-Static-Li-Demmel/7ea1c3360826ad3996f387eeb6d70815e1eb3761)
and
[Schenk06](https://etna.math.kent.edu/volumes/2001-2010/vol23/abstract.php?vol=23&pages=158-179).
They are summarized below.

> #### No check for diminishing returns

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
#### No diminishing backward error
```

[Li99](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/A-Scalable-Sparse-Direct-Solver-Using-Static-Li-Demmel/7ea1c3360826ad3996f387eeb6d70815e1eb3761)
contains an early-out criterion for the

> [iterative refinement](#iterative-refinement-of-lu-solver-solutions) that checks for deminishing
> returns in consecutive iterations. It amounts to (in reverse order):

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
[iterative refinement](#iterative-refinement-of-lu-solver-solutions) that checks for diminishing
backward error in consecutive iterations. It amounts to (in reverse order):
```

1. If $\text{backward_error} \gt \frac{1}{2}\text{last_backward_error}$, then:
   1. Stop iterative refinement.
2. Else:
   1. Go to next refinement iteration.

In power systems, however, the fact that the matrix may contain elements
[spanning several orders of magnitude](#element-size-properties-of-power-system-equations) may cause

> slow convergence far away from the optimum. The diminishing return criterion would cause the

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
slow convergence far away from the optimum. The diminishing criterion would cause the
```

algorithm to exit before the actual solution is found. Multiple refinement iterations may still

> yield better results. The power grid model therefore does not stop on deminishing returns. Instead,

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
yield better results. The power grid model therefore does not diminish the backward error. Instead,
```

a maximum amount of iterations is used in combination with the error tolerance.

#### Improved backward error calculation

> In power system equations, the matrix equation $\mathbb{M} \boldsymbol{x} = \boldsymbol{b}$ can be
> very unbalanced: some entries in the matrix $\mathbb{M}$ may be very large while others are zero or

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In power system equations, the matrix $\mathbb{M}$ in equation $\mathbb{M} \boldsymbol{x} = \boldsymbol{b}$ can contain very discrepant entries: some may be very large while others are zero or
```

uses the following backward error in the
[iterative refinement algorithm](#iterative-refinement-of-lu-solver-solutions):

$$
\begin{align*}
\text{backward_error}_{\text{Li}} &= \max_i \frac{\left|\boldsymbol{r}_i\right|}{\sum_j \left|\mathbb{M}_{i,j}\right| \left|\boldsymbol{x}_j\right| + \left|\boldsymbol{b}_i\right|} \\
&= \max_i \frac{\left|\boldsymbol{b}_i - \sum_j \mathbb{M}_{i,j} \boldsymbol{x}_j\right|}{\sum_j \left|\mathbb{M}_{i,j}\right| \left|\boldsymbol{x}_j\right| + \left|\boldsymbol{b}_i\right|} \\
&= \max_i \frac{\left|\boldsymbol{r}_i\right|}{\left(\left|\mathbb{M}\right| \cdot \left|\boldsymbol{x}\right| + \left|\boldsymbol{b}\right|\right)_i}
\end{align*}
$$

In this equation, the symbolic notation $\left|\mathbb{M}\right|$ and $\left|\boldsymbol{x}\right|$
are the matrix and vector with absolute values of the elements of $\mathbb{M}$ and $\boldsymbol{x}$
as elements, i.e., $\left|\mathbb{M}\right|_{i,j} := \left|\mathbb{M}_{i,j}\right|$ and
$\left|\boldsymbol{x}\right|_i := \left|\boldsymbol{x}_i\right|$, as
defined in [Arioli89](https://epubs.siam.org/doi/10.1137/0610013).

> Due to aforementioned, this is prone to rounding errors, and a single row with rounding errors may

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Due to the aforementioned, this is prone to rounding errors, and a single row with rounding errors may
```

cause the entire iterative refinement to fail. The power grid model therefore uses a modified
version, in which the denominator is capped to a minimum value, determined by the maximum across all
denominators:

$$
\begin{align*}
D_{\text{max}} &= \max_i\left\{\left(\left|\mathbb{M}\right|\cdot\left|\boldsymbol{x}\right| + \left|\boldsymbol{b}\right|\right)_i\right\} \\
\text{backward_error} &= \max_i \left\{
   \frac{\left|\boldsymbol{r}\right|_i}{
      \max\left\{
         \left(\left|\mathbb{M}\right|\cdot\left|\boldsymbol{x}\right| + \left|\boldsymbol{b}\right|\right)_i,
         \epsilon_{\text{backward_error}} D_{\text{max}}
      \right\}
   }
\right\}
\end{align*}
$$

$\epsilon$ may be chosen. $\epsilon = 0$ means no cut-off, while $\epsilon = 1$ means that only the

> absolute values of the residuals are relevant - not the relative values. The former is prone to
> rounding errors, while the latter may hide issues in rows with small coefficients by supressing them
> in the backward error, even if that row's residual is relatively large compared to the other
> entries, in favor of other rows with larger absolute, but smaller relative, residuals. In

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
absolute values of the residuals are relevant - not the relative values. The former is prone to
rounding errors. The latter may hide issues in rows with small coefficients by suppressing them
in the backward error. This would favor rows with larger absolute, but smaller relative, residuals. This can be the case even if that row's residual is relatively large compared to the other entries. In
```

determine the relative size of the current pivot element compared to the rest of the matrix as a
measure for the degree of ill-conditioning. The norm is a variant of the $L_{\infty}$ norm of a
matrix, which we call the block-wise off-diagonal infinite matrix norm
($L_{\infty ,\text{bwod}}$).

Since the power grid model solves the matrix equations using a multi-scale matrix solver (dense
intra-block, block-sparse for the full topological structure of the grid), the norm is also taken on
those same levels, so the calculation of the norm is _block-wise_.

In addition, the diagonal blocks may have much larger elements than the off-diagonal ones, while the
relevant information is contained mostly in the off-diagonal blocks. As a result, the block-diagonal
blocks would undesirably dominate the norm. The power grid model therefore restricts the calculation
of the norm to _off-diagonal_ blocks.

In short, the $L_{\infty ,\text{bwod}}$-norm it is the $L_{\infty}$ norm of the block-sparse matrix
with the $L_{\infty}$ norm of the individual blocks as elements, where the diagonal blocks are
skipped.

##### Block-wise off-diagonal infinite matrix norm algorithm

> The algorithm is as follows:

Author: i've removed them all except the lines where the line is described, i.e.:
`Set the remaining matrix: $\mathbb{M}_p \gets \mathbb{M}\left[p:N,p:N\right]$ with size $N_p\times N_p$, where $N_p := N - p$.`

         2. Set $\text{block_norm} \gets 0$.
         3. Loop over all rows of the current block: $k = 0..(N_{i,j} - 1)$:
            1. Set $\text{block_row_norm} \gets 0$.
            2. Loop over all columns of the current block: $l = 0..(N_{i,j} - 1)$:
               1. Set $\text{block_row_norm} \gets \text{block_row_norm} + \left\|\mathbb{M}_{i,j}\left[k,l\right]\right\|$.
            3. Calculate the new block norm: set
               $\text{block_norm} \gets \max\left\{\text{block_norm}, \text{block_row_norm}\right\}$.
            4. Continue with the next row of the current block.
         4. Set $\text{row_norm} \gets \text{row_norm} + \text{block_norm}$.
         5. Continue with the next block-column.
   3. Calculate the new norm: set
      $\text{norm} \gets \max\left\{\text{norm}, \text{row_norm}\right\}$.
   4. Continue with the next block-row.

##### Illustration of the block-wise off-diagonal infinite matrix norm calculation

This section aims to illustrate how the $L_{\infty ,\text{bwod}}$-norm differs from a regular
$L_{\infty}$-norm using the following examples.

The first example shows how the taking the block-wise norm affects the calculation of the norm.

$$

> \begin{pmatrix}

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
\begin{bmatrix}
```

\begin{pmatrix}
0 && 0 \\
0 && 0
\end{pmatrix} && \begin{pmatrix}
1 && 0 \\
0 && 3
\end{pmatrix} && \begin{pmatrix}
3 && 0 \\
0 && 0
\end{pmatrix} \\
\begin{pmatrix}
5 && 0 \\
0 && 0
\end{pmatrix} &&
\begin{pmatrix}
0 && 0 \\
0 && 0
\end{pmatrix} && \begin{pmatrix}
0 && 0 \\
0 && \frac{1}{2}
\end{pmatrix} \\
\begin{pmatrix}
0 && 0 \\
0 && 0
\end{pmatrix} &&
\begin{pmatrix}
0 && 0 \\
0 && 0
\end{pmatrix} &&
\begin{pmatrix}
1 && 0 \\
0 && 1
\end{pmatrix}
\end{pmatrix}
$$

* The regular $L_{\infty}$-norm is $\max\left\{1+3, 3, 5, \frac{1}{2}, 1, 1\right\} = 5$.
* The block-wise off-diagonal infinity $L_{\infty ,\text{bwod}}$-norm is
  $\max\left\{\max\left\{1, 3\right\}+\max\left\{3, 0\right\},\max\left\{5, 0\right\} + \max\left\{0, \frac{1}{2}\right\}, 1\right\} = \max\left\{3+3, 5+\frac{1}{2}, 1, 1\right\} = 6$.

The two norms clearly differ and even the elements that contribute most to the norm are different.

The next example shows how keeping only the off-diagonal blocks affects the norm.

$$

> \begin{pmatrix}

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
\begin{bmatrix}
```

\begin{pmatrix}
20 && 20 \\
30 && 0
\end{pmatrix} && \begin{pmatrix}
2 && 2 \\
3 && 0
\end{pmatrix} \\
\begin{pmatrix}
0 && 0 \\
0 && 3
\end{pmatrix} && \begin{pmatrix}
100 && 0 \\
0 && 1
\end{pmatrix}

> \end{pmatrix}

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
\end{bmatrix}
```

    b_{21} - b_{11}\frac{a_{21}}{a_{11}} && b_{22} - b_{12}\frac{a_{21}}{a_{11}}
\end{pmatrix} \\
&= \begin{pmatrix}
    d_{11} - b_{11}\frac{c_{11}}{a_{11}} - \left(b_{21} - b_{11}\frac{a_{21}}{a_{11}}\right) \frac{c_{12} - a_{12} \frac{c_{11}}{a_{11}}}{a_{22} - a_{12} \frac{a_{21}}{a_{11}}} &&
        d_{12} - b_{12}\frac{c_{11}}{a_{11}} - \left(b_{22} - b_{12}\frac{a_{21}}{a_{11}}\right) \frac{c_{12} - a_{12} \frac{c_{11}}{a_{11}}}{a_{22} - a_{12} \frac{a_{21}}{a_{11}}} \\
    d{21} - b_{11}\frac{c_{21}}{a_{11}} - \left(b_{21} - b_{11}\frac{a_{21}}{a_{11}}\right) \frac{c_{22} - a_{12} \frac{c_{21}}{a_{11}}}{a_{22} - a_{12} \frac{a_{21}}{a_{11}}} &&
        d_{22} - b_{12}\frac{c_{21}}{a_{11}} - \left(b_{22} - b_{12}\frac{a_{21}}{a_{11}}\right) \frac{c_{22} - a_{12} \frac{c_{21}}{a_{11}}}{a_{22} - a_{12} \frac{a_{21}}{a_{11}}}
\end{pmatrix} \\
&= \mathbb{l}_d\mathbb{u}_d
\end{align*}
$$

Generalizability to larger block sizes and block-matrix sizes follows from fhe fact that
$\mathbb{l}_c$ and $\mathbb{u}_b$ only depend on the in-block LU decomposition of the pivot block
$(\mathbb{l}_a,\mathbb{u}_a)$ and the data in the respective blocks ($\mathbb{c}$ and $\mathbb{b}$)

> in the original matrix by varying $c$ and $b$ over other blocks.

Author: approximately incorporated

> #### Block-sparse indices

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
#### Block-sparse indexing
```

The structure of the block-sparse matrices is as follows.

* The $N\times N$ block matrix $\mathbb{M}$ is interpreted as the block-matrix, with
  $\mathbb{M}\left[i,j\right]$ its block element at (0-based) indices $(i,j)$, where
  $i,j = 0..(N-1)$.
* In turn, let $\mathbb{M}\left[i,j\right]\equiv\mathbb{M}_{i,j}$ be the dense block with dimensions
  $N_i\times N_j$.

This can be graphically represented as

$$
\begin{align*}

> \mathbb{M} &\equiv \begin{pmatrix}

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
\mathbb{M} &\equiv \begin{bmatrix}
```

\mathbb{M}_{0,0}   && \cdots && \mathbb{M}_{0,N-1} \\
\vdots    && \ddots && \vdots \\
\mathbb{M}_{N-1,0} && \cdots && \mathbb{M}_{N-1,N-1}

> \end{pmatrix} \\
> &\equiv \begin{pmatrix}

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
\end{bmatrix} \\
&\equiv \begin{bmatrix}
```

\begin{pmatrix}
   \mathbb{M}_{0,0}\left[0,0\right]     && \cdots && \mathbb{M}_{0,0}\left[0,N_j-1\right] \\
   \vdots                      && \ddots && \vdots \\
   \mathbb{M}_{0,0}\left[N_i-1,0\right] && \cdots && \mathbb{M}_{0,0}\left[N_i-1,N_j-1\right]
\end{pmatrix} && \cdots && \begin{pmatrix}
   \mathbb{M}_{0,N-1}\left[0,0\right]     && \cdots && \mathbb{M}_{0,N-1}\left[0,N_j-1\right] \\
   \vdots                        && \ddots && \vdots \\
   \mathbb{M}_{0,N-1}\left[N_i-1,0\right] && \cdots && \mathbb{M}_{0,N-1}\left[N_i-1,N_j-1\right] \end{pmatrix} \\
\vdots && \ddots && \vdots \\
\begin{pmatrix}
   \mathbb{M}_{N-1,0}\left[0,0\right]     && \cdots && \mathbb{M}_{N-1,0}\left[0,N_j-1\right] \\
   \vdots                        && \ddots && \vdots \\
   \mathbb{M}_{N-1,0}\left[N_i-1,0\right] && \cdots && \mathbb{M}_{N-1,0}\left[N_i-1,N_j-1\right]
\end{pmatrix} && \cdots && \begin{pmatrix}
   \mathbb{M}_{N-1,N-1}\left[0,0\right]     && \cdots && \mathbb{M}_{N-1,N-1}\left[0,N_j-1\right] \\
   \vdots                          && \ddots && \vdots \\
   \mathbb{M}_{N-1,N-1}\left[N_i-1,0\right] && \cdots && \mathbb{M}_{N-1,N-1}\left[N_i-1,N_j-1\right] \end{pmatrix}

> \end{pmatrix}

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
\end{bmatrix}
```

\end{align*}
$$

Because of the sparse structure and the fact that all $\mathbb{M}_{i,j}$ have the same shape, it is
much more efficient to store the blocks $\mathbb{M}_{i,j}$ in a vector $\mathbb{M}_{\tilde{k}}$
where $\tilde{k}$ is a reordered index from $(i,j) \mapsto \tilde{k}$. This mapping, in turn, is
stored as an index pointer, i.e., a vector of vectors of indices, with the outer index given by the
row-index $i$, and the inner vector containing the values of $j$ for which $\mathbb{M}_{i,j}$ may be
non-zero. All topologically relevant matrix elements, as well as [fill-ins](#pivot-operations), are
included in this mapping. The following illustrates this mapping.

$$
\begin{align*}

> \begin{pmatrix}

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
\begin{bmatrix}
```

\mathbb{M}_{0,0} &&         &&         && \mathbb{M}_{0,3} \\
        && \mathbb{M}_{1,1} && \mathbb{M}_{1,2} &&         \\
        && \mathbb{M}_{2,1} && \mathbb{M}_{2,2} && \mathbb{M}_{2,3} \\
\mathbb{M}_{3,0} &&         && \mathbb{M}_{3,2} && \mathbb{M}_{3,3}

> \end{pmatrix} &\equiv

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
\end{bmatrix} &\equiv
```

\begin{bmatrix}
\mathbb{M}_{0,0} && \mathbb{M}_{0,3} && \mathbb{M}_{1,1} && \mathbb{M}_{1,2} && \mathbb{M}_{2,1} && \mathbb{M}_{2,2} && \mathbb{M}_{2,3} && \mathbb{M}_{3,0} && \mathbb{M}_{3,2} && \mathbb{M}_{3,3} \\
[[0 && 3] && [1 && 2] && [1 && 2 && 3] && [0 && 2 && 3]] \\
\end{bmatrix} \\
&\equiv
\begin{bmatrix}
\mathbb{M}_{0,0} && \mathbb{M}_{0,3} && \mathbb{M}_{1,1} && \mathbb{M}_{1,2} && \mathbb{M}_{2,1} && \mathbb{M}_{2,2} && \mathbb{M}_{2,3} && \mathbb{M}_{3,0} && \mathbb{M}_{3,2} && \mathbb{M}_{3,3} && \\
[0 && 3 && 1 && 2 && 1 && 2 && 3 && 0 && 2 && 3] && \\
[0 && && 2 && && 4 && && && 7 && && && && 10]
\end{bmatrix}
\end{align*}
$$

In the first equation, the upper row contains the present block entries and the bottom row their

> column indices per row to obtain a flattened representation of the matrix. In the last equivalence,

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
column indices per row to obtain a flattened representation of the matrix. In the last equation,
```
(?)

Author: it's not just an equation, it's an equivalence relation. also, it would have been "equality"

the column indices, in turn, are also flattened into a separate flattened representation of the

> column indices and the start indices of each row - the index pointer (`indptr`). Note that the size

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
column indices and the start indices of each row, i.e., the index pointer (`indptr`). Note that the size
```

> of `indptr` is 1 greater than the amount of rows. This enables describing the amount of elements
> in each row as the difference between its element in `indptr` and the next element.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
of `indptr` is 1 greater than the amount of rows. This enables describing the amount of elements
in each row as the difference between the current element and the next element.
```

Author: approximately incorporated

Looping over the rows and columns becomes trivial. Let $\text{indptr}$ be the start. The double loop
becomes:

1. Loop all rows: $i=0..(N-1)$:
   1. The column indices for this row start at $\text{indptr}\left[i\right]$.
   2. The column indices for this row stop at $\text{indptr}\left[i+1\right]$.
   3. Loop all columns:
      $j=\left(\text{indptr}\left[i\right]\right)..\left(\text{indptr}\left[i+1\right]\right)$:
      1. The current row index is $i$.
      2. The current column index is $j$.

### Block-sparse LU solving

> Solving an equation $\mathbb{M} \boldsymbol{x} = \boldsymbol{b}$ using a
> [pre-factored LU factorization](#block-sparse-lu-factorization) is done using the regular forward
> and backward substitutions. Since the matrix is already ordered such that the amount of

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Equation $\mathbb{M} \boldsymbol{x} = \boldsymbol{b}$ can be solved with LU factorization](#block-sparse-lu-factorization) 
by forward and backward substitutions. 
```

Author: approximately incorporated

> [fill-ins](#pivot-operations) is minimal, permutations are restricted to within each block. The

Author: well, kind of. you can, of course, decide to pivot anyways, but that would defeat the whole purpose of preordering the matrix. i've rewritten it to (hopefully) disambiguate

$\mathbb{L}\boldsymbol{y} = \boldsymbol{b}^{\prime}$, followed by the backwards substitution by
solving $\mathbb{U}\boldsymbol{z} = \mathbb{y}$. The final result is then obtained by applying the
column permutation within each block: $\boldsymbol{x} = \mathbb{Q}\boldsymbol{z}$.

#### Forward substitution

The row permutation is applied as follows.

1. Loop over all block-rows: $i=0..(N-1)$:
   1. If the matrix is a block matrix:
      1. Apply the current row's block permutation:
         $\boldsymbol{b}\left[i\right] \gets \mathbb{P}\left[i\right] \cdot \boldsymbol{b}\left[i\right]$.
      2. Proceed.
   2. Else:
      1. Proceed.

The equation $\mathbb{L}\boldsymbol{y} = \mathbb{P}\boldsymbol{b}$ is solved as follows.

1. Loop over all block-rows: $i=0..(N-1)$:
   1. Loop over all lower-triangle off-diagonal columns (beware of sparsity): $j=0..(i-1)$:
      1. $\boldsymbol{b}\left[i\right] \gets \boldsymbol{b}\left[i\right] - \mathbb{L}\left[i,j\right] \cdot \boldsymbol{b}\left[j\right]$.
      2. Continue with next block-column.
   2. If the matrix is a block matrix:
      1. Follow the same steps within the block.
      2. Proceed.
   3. Else:

>       1. Proceed.

Reviewer 2: Perhaps elaborate a bit on the four `Proceed.`? And four below as well?

Author: changed to `Proceed with the next iteration`

#### Backward substitution

The equation $Uz = y$ is solved as follows.

1. Loop over all block-rows in reverse order: $i=(N-1)..0$:
   1. Loop over all upper-triangle off-diagonal columns (beware of sparsity): $j=(i+1)..0$:
      1. $\boldsymbol{b}\left[i\right] \gets \boldsymbol{b}\left[i\right] - \mathbb{U}\left[i,j\right] \cdot \boldsymbol{b}\left[j\right]$.
      2. Continue with next block-column.
   2. Handle the diagonal element:
      1. If the matrix is a block matrix:
         1. Follow the same steps within the block.
         2. Proceed.
      2. Else:
         1. $\boldsymbol{b}\left[i\right] \gets \boldsymbol{b}\left[i\right] / \mathbb{U}\left[i,i\right]$.
         2. Proceed.

Apply the column permutation as follows.

1. Loop over all block-rows: $i=0..(N-1)$:
   1. If the matrix is a block matrix:
      1. Apply the current row's block permutation:
         $\boldsymbol{b}\left[i\right] \gets \mathbb{Q}\left[i\right] \cdot \boldsymbol{b}\left[i\right]$.
      2. Proceed.
   2. Else:
      1. Proceed.

```{note}
If [pivot perturbation](#pivot-perturbation) was used to obtain the LU decomposition, the solution

> obtained here is an approximation of the exact solution. The approximation can be improved using

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
obtained here is an approximation to the exact solution. The accuracy can be improved using
```

$k = 0..(p-1)$. Similarly, $\widehat{\underline{m}_p^{-1}\underline{q}_p \underline{r}_p^T}$ is
symbolic notation for the block-matrix of solutions of the equation
$\underline{m}_p^{-1} x_{k,l;p} = \underline{q}_{k,p} \underline{r}_{p,l}^T$, where
$k,l = 0..(p-1)$. That is:

$$
\begin{align*}
\overrightarrow{\underline{m}_p^{-1}\underline{q}_p}
&= \begin{bmatrix}\underline{m}_p^{-1}\underline{q}_{0,p} \\
\vdots \\
\underline{m}_p^{-1} \underline{q}_{N-1,p} \end{bmatrix} \\
\widehat{\underline{m}_p^{-1}\underline{q}_p \underline{r}_p^T}
&= \begin{bmatrix}\underline{m}_p^{-1} \underline{q}_{0,p} \underline{r}_{p,0}^T && \cdots &&
\underline{m}_p^{-1} \underline{q}_{0,p} \underline{r}_{p,N-1}^T \\
\vdots && \ddots && \vdots \\
\underline{m}_p^{-1} \underline{q}_{0,p} \underline{r}_{p,0}^T && \cdots &&
\underline{m}_p^{-1} \underline{q}_{N-1,p} \underline{r}_{p,N-1}^T \end{bmatrix}
\end{align*}
$$

Instead of calculating $\underline{m}_p^{-1}$ to obtain $\underline{m}_p^{-1} x_p$, the power grid
model first solves the matrix equation $l_p y_p = p_p a_p$, followed by solving $u_p z_p = y_p$. The

> end-result is then $\underline{m}_p^{-1} x_p = q_p z_p$.

Author: This is another potential improvement to the LU solver implementation: because matrix inversion is equivalent to solving this set of equations on a matrix once, it actually may be faster to pre-calculate and then left multiply each block in the above by $\underline{m}^{-1}$ iff the row contains more than one element (which is pretty much always the case), and the difference in performance increases as the amount of off-diagonal elements increases.

Reviewer 3: This was the very first prototype of the LU Solver. It quickly proved to be extremely numerically not statable. Calculating inverse explicitly you lose already half of the precision. Applying that inverse to other off-diagonal blocks makes the result much less accurate and leads to divergence of outer loop (NRPF).

Have a look at the original PR, especially this commit

https://github.com/PowerGridModel/power-grid-model/pull/77/commits/08ee7fbc00508c40b30ec5a832e492a0c4d97698

Reviewer 3: You can explicitly document now in the docs to state applying inverse of diagonal blocks will result in numerical instability.

Reviewer 3: Another thing I have tried is to use `EIGEN` build-in function to do the triangular solver instead of writing them manually. However, the benchmark was not so convincing. For some reason the `EIGEN` triangular solver is much slower than manually written stuff. Maybe this can be an investigation to understand why.

https://github.com/PowerGridModel/power-grid-model/pull/77/commits/2cfe09bb1d270f607737386f5b917c5ae166b399

Author: > This was the very first prototype of the LU Solver. It quickly proved to be extremely numerically not statable. Calculating inverse explicitly you lose already half of the precision. Applying that inverse to other off-diagonal blocks makes the result much less accurate and leads to divergence of outer loop (NRPF).
> 
> Have a look at the original PR, especially this commit
> 
> [08ee7fb](https://github.com/PowerGridModel/power-grid-model/commit/08ee7fbc00508c40b30ec5a832e492a0c4d97698)

> You can explicitly document now in the docs to state applying inverse of diagonal blocks will result in numerical instability.

Right. Thanks, that's useful input! Done.

> Another thing I have tried is to use `EIGEN` build-in function to do the triangular solver instead of writing them manually. However, the benchmark was not so convincing. For some reason the `EIGEN` triangular solver is much slower than manually written stuff. Maybe this can be an investigation to understand why.
> 
> [2cfe09b](https://github.com/PowerGridModel/power-grid-model/commit/2cfe09bb1d270f607737386f5b917c5ae166b399)

do you want me to document that we have done a quick investigation and ran into a dead-end? I don't think it's worth investigating at this time.

Reviewer 3: We don't need to mention anything in the docs. This is minor implementation choice.

We can later in the future to further benchmark why `EIGEN` is slower.

without selecting a different pivot element, at the cost of propating rounding errors.
slightly different matrix that is then iteratively refined.

#### Pivot perturbation algorithm

The following pivot perturbation algorithm works for both real and complex matrix equations. Let $M$
be the matrix, $\left\|M\right\|_{\infty ,\text{bwod}}$ the
[block-wise off-diagonal infinite norm](#block-wise-off-diagonal-infinite-matrix-norm) of the matrix.

1. Set $\epsilon \gets \text{perturbation_threshold} * \left\|M\right\|_{\text{bwod}}$
2. If $|\text{pivot_element}| \lt \epsilon$, then:
   1. If $|\text{pivot_element}| = 0$, then:
      1. Set $\text{direction} = 1$.
      2. Proceed.
   2. Else:
      1. Set $\text{direction}\left(\text{pivot_element}\right) \gets \text{pivot_element} / |\text{pivot_element}|$.
      2. Proceed.
   3. Set $\text{pivot_element} \gets \epsilon * \text{direction}\left(\text{pivot_element}\right)$.

$\text{direction}$ ensures that the complex phase of the pivot element is preserved, with a fallback
the positive real axis when the pivot element is identically zero.

> ### Iterative refinement of LU solvers

Author: ```suggestion
### Iterative refinement of LU solver solution
```

the algorithm is as follows:

1. Initialize:
   1. Set the initial estimate: $x_{\text{est}} = 0$.
   2. Set the initial residual: $r \gets b$.
   3. Set the initial backward error: $\text{backward_error} = \infty$.
   4. Set the number of iterations to 0.
2. Iteratively refine; loop:
   1. Check stop criteria:
      1. If $\text{backward_error} \leq \epsilon$, then:
         1. Convergence reached: stop the refinement process.
      2. Else, if the number of iterations > maximum allowed amount of iterations, then:
         1. Convergence not reached; iterative refinement not possible: raise a sparse matrix
            error.
      3. Else:
         1. Increase the number of iterations.
         2. Proceed.
   2. Solve $\tilde{A} \cdot \Delta x = r$ for $\Delta x$.
   3. Calculate the backward error with the original $x$ and $r$ using the [backward error formula](#improved-backward-error-calculation).
   4. Set the next estimation of $x$: $x_{\text{est}} \gets x_{\text{est}} + \Delta x$.
   5. Set the residual: $r \gets b - A \cdot x$.

Because the backward error is calculated on the $x$ and $r$ from the previous iteration, the

> iterative refinement loop will always be executed twice.

Author: this is a potential improvement

Reviewer 3: I do not understand the logic here? What do you mean twice? The first time is just the solution of the original formula $Ax=b$ right? Because you initialize $r=b$. So you do only one actual iterative refinement.

Author: we always do one actual iterative refinement, but in the limit where $\epsilon_{\text{backward_error}} \to \infty$, iterative refinement is never needed. If the threshold is set to infinity, it should break after the first time it goes through the loop, but in the current implementation, it will always do another solve-and-refine step

Reviewer 3: I still do not understand your point here. So we now do the following initialization

1. berr <- inf.
2. r = b

The loop is (ignore the max limit)

while (berr > epsilon_converge)
1. solve A*dx = r
2. update berr, and update x
3. update r

So

1. In the first iteration, we are just solving Ax=b, which is the original equation. The berr will be very big. This should not be seen as iterative refinement.
2. In the second iteration, we do one iterative refinement. And we get the new berr.
3. If now the new berr is within the threshold, the loop terminates.

We always do ONE iterative refinement. But you mentioned in the doc that "iterative refinement will always be twice".

Reviewer 3: You are documenting the mathematics, not the C++ implementation. Mentioning how many times a program loop is run is not necessary. Instead, we should just mention: 

1. We do the solve step for the original $b$.
2. We do at least one iterative refinement on $r$.

For your point about "the refinement step might not be necessary". This is not logical. Without calculating the back error (for the first time), you could not possibly know if the iterative refinement step is necessary.

Author: cfr. offline discussion: the logic amounts to the following:

this logic in the Li99 paper:
![image](https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/6ee6904a-8e72-40d8-95c8-90c165ce5480)

can be reordered without changing the logic as
```
berr = max_i |r|i / (|A|*|x| + |b|)_i                ... componentwise backward error
if (berr > epsilon and berr <= 1/2 * lastberr) then
    Solve A * dx = r                                 ... triangular solve
    x = x + dx
```

this is much more efficient, because the solve only happens if it is necessary.

Our current implementation does this same logic, effectively followed by an additional refinement step (which is NOT used in the backward error calculation!!!).

My proposal is to reorder some of the statements in the PGM so that we follow the original paper again (except in a different order), by changing `// calculate backward error and then iterate x` to `// iterate x and then calculate backward error` in https://github.com/PowerGridModel/power-grid-model/blob/main/power_grid_model_c/power_grid_model/include/power_grid_model/math_solver/sparse_lu_solver.hpp#L438 . This amounts to reorganizing some statements in https://github.com/PowerGridModel/power-grid-model/blob/main/power_grid_model_c/power_grid_model/include/power_grid_model/math_solver/sparse_lu_solver.hpp#L514-L531 .

NOTE: The `epsilon_threshold` was also determined on the existing logic, so it might also need some additional tweaking (TBD).

Author: @TonyXiang8787 can you please double-check whether this is corrrectly resolved in the latest version?

* LU-decomposition is the best choice, because QR-decomposition and Cholesky-decomposition cannot
  solve the power system equations efficiently as a consequence of the properties
* Alternative LU-solver implementations are optimized for a variety of use cases that are less
  sparse than the ones encountered in power systems.
* Alternative LU-solver implementations do not have good block-sparse matrix equation solvers.

## Implementation

The LU-solver implemented in the power grid model consists of 3 components:

* A block-sparse LU-solver that:
  * handles factorization using the topological structure up to block-level
  * solves the sparse matrix equation given the factorization
* A dense LU-factor that handles individual blocks within the matrix equation

### Dense LU-factorization

The power grid model uses a modified version of the
[`LUFullPiv` defined in Eigen](https://gitlab.com/libeigen/eigen/-/blob/3.4/Eigen/src/LU/FullPivLU.h)
(credits go to the original author). The modification adds opt-in support for
[pivot perturbation](#pivot-perturbation).

#### Dense LU-factorization process

The Gaussian elimination process itself is as usual. Let

> $M_p\equiv\begin{bmatrix}m_p && \vec{r}_p^T \\ \vec{q}_p && \hat{M}_p\end{bmatrix}$, where $p$ is

Reviewer 3: This is for me an unusual way of describing the problem? Usually ,we are talking about 9 blocks in the process. But you only mentioned 4.

```
[
[a11, a12, a13],
[a21, a22, a23],
[a31, a32, a33],
]
```

Where
a11: block containing handled L/U combination where the pivots have been already handled
a12: already handled U part just above the current pivot
a13: already handled U part above the rest pivots to be handled
a21: already handled L part just in the left of current pivot
a22: current pivot
a23: current U part
a31: already handled L part in the left of the rest pivots to be handled
a32: current L part
a33: rest of the matrix which will be adjusted by current elimination process

Author: what do you mean i mentioned 4 blocks? i described the process for arbitrary block size. sym/asym is one thing, but the specific solvers can also add more dimensions to the block size. E.g. for NRPF, we treat the P and Q components separately, so it's not 3x3 but 9x9, right?

Since the process is iterative, you can step in at any pivot element $p$ and treat the rest as described until the next iteration $p$ needs to start.

Reviewer 3: I mean, we should not omit the part which have been already factorized. We have to show the entire matrix in place, including the upper and left part of the matrix which already have the factorized L/U values.

Reviewer 3: When you at pivot `k`, we should also show the rows and columns of `0 \to k-1`.

Author: i did it in a couple locations, but it makes the docs actually less readable the more i add it. can you please have a look to see whether it is sufficient as is?

Author: better?

Author: @TonyXiang8787 can you please double-check whether this is corrrectly resolved in the latest version?

         1. Apply [pivot perturbation](#pivot-perturbation).
         2. Proceed.
      2. Else, if the matrix is singular (pivot element is identically $0$), then:
         1. Raise a `SparseMatrixError`.
      3. Else:
         1. Proceed.
   4. Else:
      1. Proceed.
   5. Swap the first and pivot row and column of $M_p$, so that the pivot element is in the
      top-left corner of the remaining matrix:
      1. $M_p\left[0,0:N_p\right] \leftrightarrow M\left[i_p,0:N_p\right]$
      2. $M_p\left[0:N_p,0\right] \leftrightarrow M\left[0:N_p,j_p\right]$
   6. Apply Gaussian elimination for the current pivot element:
      1. $M_p\left[0,0:N_p\right] \gets \frac{1}{M_p[0,0]}M_p\left[0,0:N_p\right]$
      2. $M_p\left[1:N_p,0:N_p\right] \gets M_p\left[1:N_p,0:N_p\right] - M_p\left[1:N_p,0\right] \otimes M_p\left[0,0:N_p\right]$
   7. Accumulate the permutation matrices:
      1. In $P$: swap $p \leftrightarrow p + i_p$
      2. In $Q$: swap $p \leftrightarrow p + j_p$
   8. Continue with the next $p$ to factorize the the bottom-right block.

$L$ is now the matrix composed of ones on the diagonal and the bottom-left off-diagonal triangle of

> $M$ and zeros in the upper-right off-diagonal triangle. $Q$ is the matrix composed of the

Reviewer 3: I think you mean U is the matrix in the upper triangle?

upper-right triangle of $M$ including the diagonal elements and zeros in the lower-left off-diagonal
triangle.

```{note}
In the actual implementation, we use a slightly different order of operations: instead of raising
the `SparseMatrixError` immediately, we break from the loop and throw after that. This does not
change the functional behavior.
```

### Block-sparse LU-factorization

The LU-factorization process for block-sparse matrices is similar to that for
[dense matrices](#dense-lu-factorization), but in this case, $m_p$ is a block element, and
$\vec{q}_p$, $\vec{r}_p^T$ and $\hat{M}_p$ consist of block elements as well. Notice that the
inverse $m_p^{-1}$ can be calculated from is LU-decomposition, which can be obtained from the
[dense LU-factorization process](#dense-lu-factorization-process).

#### Block-sparse LU-factorization process

The Gaussian elimination process itself is as usual. Completely analogously to and following the
same conventions as [before](#dense-lu-factorization-process), let

> $\underline{M}_p\equiv\begin{bmatrix}\underline{m}_p && \vec{\underline{r}}_p^T \\ \vec{\underline{q}}_p && \hat{\underline{M}}_p\end{bmatrix}$

Reviewer 3: 1. Why do you use underscore? Underscore in EE means specifically complex numbers.
2. Same comment as above. Using 4 blocks instead of 9 blocks is confusing for the readers. Reader might think this is only applicable for the first pivot.

Author: I think i now understand what you mean. I'm describing the process at some point in the iteration during treatment of pivot element $p$.

I can indeed extend it, but the $p-1$ row and column do not contribute to this part of the process. What do you recommend?

Reviewer 3: The $0 \to p-1`$ does contribute in the process. If you permute columns/rows to get the max pivot for element $p$. The previous columns and rows have to be permuted as well.

Also, for the reader, include previous rows/columns shows that the factorization is in the middle of the process instead of just the beginning.

Author: @TonyXiang8787 can you please double-check whether this is corrrectly resolved in the latest version?

$\underline{m}_p = \underline{p}_p^{-1} \underline{l}_p \underline{u}_p \underline{q}_p^{-1}$, where
he lower-case helps avoiding confusion with the block-sparse matrix components. Gaussian elimination
constructs the matrices

$$
\begin{align*}
\underline{L}_p &= \begin{bmatrix} 1 && \vec{\underline{0}}^T \\ \overrightarrow{\underline{m}_p^{-1}\underline{q}_p} && \hat{\underline{D}}_p\end{bmatrix}
\underline{Q}_p &= \begin{bmatrix} \underline{m}_p && \vec{\underline{r}}_p^T \\ \vec{\underline{0}} && \hat{\underline{M}}_p - \widehat{\underline{m}_p^{-1}\underline{q}_p \underline{r}_p^T}\end{bmatrix} \equiv \begin{bmatrix} \underline{1} && \vec{\underline{r}}_p^T \\ \vec{0} && \underline{M}_{p+1} \end{bmatrix}
\end{align*}
$$

Here, $\overrightarrow{\underline{m}_p^{-1}\underline{q}_p}$ is symbolic notation for the
block-vector of solutions of the equation $\underline{m}_p x_{k;p} = \underline{q}_{k;p}$, where
$k = 0..(p-1)$. Similarly, $\widehat{\underline{m}_p^{-1}\underline{q}_p \underline{r}_p^T}$ is
symbolic notation for the block-matrix of solutions of the equation
$\underline{m}_p^{-1} x_{k,l;p} = \underline{q}_{k,p} \underline{r}_{p,l}^T$, where

> $k,l = 0..(p-1)$. That is:

Reviewer 3: This is not correct and was actually one of the attempts in the prototyping. It did not work and produced the same numerical instability as doing the explicit inverse.

The real implementation now, is we do not fully solve $x_{k;p}$, but only apply the two separate triangular solve in the current L and U part.

We apply lower-triangular solve in the U part which is right to the current pivot:
https://github.com/PowerGridModel/power-grid-model/blob/8d410ae88f345e778d22a110893ab7aeb141124d/power_grid_model_c/power_grid_model/include/power_grid_model/math_solver/sparse_lu_solver.hpp#L313-L329

We then apply upper-triangular solver in the L part which is below the current pivot:
https://github.com/PowerGridModel/power-grid-model/blob/8d410ae88f345e778d22a110893ab7aeb141124d/power_grid_model_c/power_grid_model/include/power_grid_model/math_solver/sparse_lu_solver.hpp#L342-L366

This is happening in the whole LU factorization part.

In the solve part, we do the rest lower/upper triangular solve on the actual `b` and `y`.

Author: cfr. offline discussion: updated documentation with actual way of doing things.

<!--
SPDX-FileCopyrightText: Contributors to the Power Grid Model project <powergridmodel@lfenergy.org>

SPDX-License-Identifier: MPL-2.0
-->

# LU Solver

Power system equations can be modeled as matrix equations. A matrix equation solver is therefore
key to the power grid model.

> This section documents the need for a custom sparse LU-solver and its implementation.

Author: Add TOC

essentially amounts to solving the matrix equation
$\mathbb{L}\boldsymbol{y} = \boldsymbol{b}^{\prime}$, followed by the backwards substitution by
solving $\mathbb{U}\boldsymbol{z} = \mathbb{y}$. The final result is then obtained by applying the
column permutation: $\boldsymbol{x} = \mathbb{Q}\boldsymbol{z}$.

#### Forward substitution

The row permutation is applied as follows.

1. Loop over all block-rows: $i=0..(N-1)$:
   1. If the matrix is a block matrix:
      1. Apply the current row's block permutation:
         $\boldsymbol{b}\left[i\right] \gets \mathbb{P}\left[i\right] \cdot \boldsymbol{b}\left[i\right]$.
      2. Proceed.
   2. Else:
      1. Proceed.

The equation $Ly = Pb$ is solved as follows.

1. Loop over all block-rows: $i=0..(N-1)$:
   1. Loop over all lower-triangle off-diagonal columns (beware of sparsity): $j=0..(i-1)$:
      1. $\boldsymbol{b}\left[i\right] \gets \boldsymbol{b}\left[i\right] - \mathbb{L}\left[i,j\right] \cdot \boldsymbol{b}\left[j\right]$.
      2. Continue with next block-column.
   2. If the matrix is a block matrix:
      1. Follow the same steps within the block.
      2. Proceed.
   3. Else:
      1. Proceed.

> The equation $Uz = y$ is solved as follows.

Author: ```suggestion
#### Backward substitution

The equation $Uz = y$ is solved as follows.
```

 && \ddots && \ddots && 0 \\
 && && \boldsymbol{l}_{N-2} && 1
\end{bmatrix} &= \begin{bmatrix}
1 && 0 && \cdots && 0 \\
m_0^{-1} \boldsymbol{q}_0 && 1 && \ddots && \vdots \\
&& \ddots && \ddots && 0 \\
&& && m_{N-2}^{-1} \boldsymbol{q}_{N-2} && 1
\end{bmatrix} \\

> \mathbb{U} = \begin{bmatrix}

Reviewer: U missed some dots and elements in the upper right corner of this matrix and also the one after the =

Author: that is intentional, because the bold-faced elements are vectors. i'll update the one on the right-hand side to illustrate this

Author: i changed the approach. can you re-review please?
